Mobile Assisted Language Learning
The increased use of sophisticated mobile devices opens up new possibil-
ities and challenges for language teachers and learners, which has led to
an increasing need to consider issues relating to mobile technologies
specifically. To date, there is no comprehensive book-length treatment
of issues relating to mobile-assisted language learning (MALL). This
book fills that gap, providing a resource for present and future language
teachers, and for graduate students of applied linguistics and TESOL, to
understand how mobile devices can best be used for language teaching.
It is founded on existing research, practice and theory, and offers a
balanced perspective, based on the author’s own experiences with
mobile learning – considering the limitations of such an approach, as
well as the benefits. Written in a practical and approachable tone, it
provides a much-needed guide to MALL, and its fascinating insights
promote further debate within the field.
Glenn Stockwell is Professor of Applied Linguistics at Graduate School of
International Culture and Communication Studies, Waseda University.
He is co-author of CALL Dimensions (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
2006) with Mike Levy and editor of Computer Assisted Language
Learning: Diversity in Research and Practice (Cambridge University
Press, 2012). He is Editor-in-Chief of The JALT CALL Journal and
the Australian Journal of Applied Linguistics and Associate Editor of
Computer Assisted Language Learning.
Published online by Cambridge University Press
THE CAMBRIDGE APPLIED LINGUISTICS SERIES
The authority on cutting-edge Applied Linguistics research
Series Editors 2007–present: Carol A. Chapelle and Susan Hunston
1988–2007: Michael H. Long and Jack C. Richards
For a complete list of titles please visit: www.cambridge.org
Recent titles in this series:
Mobile Assisted Language Learning
Concepts, Contexts and Challenges
Glenn Stockwell
Research Genres Across Languages
Multilingual Communication Online
Carmen Pérez-Llantada
Validity Argument in Language Testing
Case Studies of Validation Research
Edited by Carol A. Chapelle and Erik Voss
Doing English Grammar
Theory, Description and Practice
Roger Berry
Learner Corpus Research Meets Second
Language Acquisition
Bert Le Bruyn and Magali Paquot
Second Language Speech Fluency
From Research to Practice
Parvaneh Tavakoli and Clare Wright
Ontologies of English
Conceptualising the Language
for Learning, Teaching, and Assessment
Edited by Christopher J. Hall and
Rachel Wicaksono
Task-Based Language Teaching
Theory and Practice
Rod Ellis, Peter Skehan, Shaofeng Li,
Natsuko Shintani and Craig Lambert
Feedback in Second Language Writing
Contexts and Issues
2nd Edition
Edited by Ken Hyland and Fiona Hyland
Language and Television Series
A Linguistic Approach to TV Dialogue
Monika Bednarek
Intelligibility, Oral Communication, and the
Teaching of Pronunciation
John M. Levis
Multilingual Education
Between Language Learning
and Translanguaging
Edited by Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
Learning Vocabulary in Another Language
2nd Edition
I. S. P. Nation
Narrative Research in Applied Linguistics
Edited by Gary Barkhuizen
Teacher Research in Language Teaching
A Critical Analysis
Simon Borg
Figurative Language, Genre and Register
Alice Deignan, Jeannette Littlemore and
Elena Semino
Exploring ELF
Academic English Shaped by Non-native
Speakers
Anna Mauranen
Genres across the Disciplines
Student Writing in Higher Education
Hilary Nesi and Sheena Gardner
Disciplinary Identities
Individuality and Community in Academic
Discourse
Ken Hyland
Replication Research in Applied Linguistics
Edited by Graeme Porte
The Language of Business Meetings
Michael Handford
Reading in a Second Language
Moving from Theory to Practice
William Grabe
Modelling and Assessing Vocabulary
Knowledge
Edited by Helmut Daller, James Milton and
Jeanine Treffers-Daller
Practice in a Second Language
Perspectives from Applied Linguistics and
Cognitive Psychology
Edited by Robert M. DeKeyser
Task-Based Language Education
From Theory to Practice
Edited by Kris van den Branden
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Second Language Needs Analysis
Edited by Michael H. Long
Insights into Second Language Reading
A Cross-Linguistic Approach
Keiko Koda
Research Genres
Exploration and Applications
John M. Swales
Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning
Edited by Bonny Norton and
Kelleen Toohey
Exploring the Dynamics of Second Language
Writing
Edited by Barbara Kroll
Understanding Expertise in Teaching
Case Studies of Second Language Teachers
Amy B. M. Tsui
Criterion-Referenced Language Testing
James Dean Brown and Thom Hudson
Corpora in Applied Linguistics
Susan Hunston
Pragmatics in Language Teaching
Edited by Kenneth R. Rose and Gabriele Kasper
Cognition and Second Language Instruction
Edited by Peter Robinson
Research Perspectives on English for
Academic Purposes
Edited by John Flowerdew and Matthew
Peacock
Computer Applications in Second Language
Acquisition
Foundations for Teaching, Testing and
Research
Carol A. Chapelle
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Mobile Assisted
Language Learning
Concepts, Contexts and Challenges
Glenn Stockwell
Waseda University
Published online by Cambridge University Press
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108470728
DOI: 10.1017/9781108652087
© Glenn Stockwell 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Stockwell, Glenn, 1970– author.
Title: Mobile assisted language learning : concepts, contexts and challenges /
Glenn Stockwell.
Description: Cambridge ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 2021. |
Series: Cambridge applied linguistics | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021024652 (print) | LCCN 2021024653 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781108470728 (hardback) | ISBN 9781108456425 (paperback) |
ISBN 9781108652087 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Mobile-assisted language learning. | Mobile communication systems
in education. | BISAC: LANGUAGE ARTS & DISCIPLINES / Linguistics / General
Classification: LCC P53.28 .S76 2021 (print) | LCC P53.28 (ebook) |
DDC 371.33–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021024652
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021024653
ISBN 978-1-108-47072-8 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-108-45642-5 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University Press
For Takana
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Contents
List of Figures xiii
List of Tables xiv
Acknowledgements xv
List of Abbreviations xvii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 The Nature of MALL 6
1.3 Understanding MALL 11
1.4 Overview of the Book 15
1.5 Discussion Questions 19
2 Fundamental Considerations of Teaching with
Mobile Technologies 21
2.1 Introduction 21
2.2 Using the Terms CALL and MALL 23
2.3 Emerging Affordances of Mobile Devices 27
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research 31
2.5 From Affordance-Based to Pedagogy-
Based Practice 38
2.6 Complexity of Research, Theory and Practice
in MALL 40
2.7 Summary 43
2.8 Discussion Questions 44
3 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning and Teaching 45
3.1 Introduction 45
3.2 Shifting Roles for Learners 46
3.3 Shifting Roles for Teachers 48
3.4 Resistance to Technology Use in Education 54
3.5 Mobile Learning in Formal and Informal
Learning Contexts 57
3.6 Summary 64
3.7 Discussion Questions 64
ix
Published online by Cambridge University Press
4 Research Considerations in MALL 66
4.1 Introduction 66
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL 69
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 77
4.3.1 Observations 78
4.3.2 Introspective Methods 80
4.3.3 Ethnographic Methods 82
4.3.4 Elicitation Techniques 83
4.3.5 Experimental Methods 86
4.4 Summary 88
4.5 Discussion Questions 88
5 Theory in MALL 90
5.1 Introduction 90
5.2 Informal and Formal Theories 91
5.3 Fundamentals of Theory 93
5.4 Theory in CALL 95
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 99
5.5.1 Theories of Technology 100
5.5.2 Theories of Complexity 105
5.5.3 Theories of Motivation 106
5.5.4 Social Models of Language Learning 109
5.6 Summary 111
5.7 Discussion Questions 113
6 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues 114
6.1 Introduction 114
6.2 Physical Issues 115
6.2.1 Screen Size 115
6.2.2 Input Methods 116
6.2.3 Storage Capacity 116
6.2.4 Processor Speed 117
6.2.5 Battery Life 117
6.2.6 Compatibility 117
6.2.7 Network Access 118
6.3 Psychosocial Issues 118
6.4 Pedagogical Issues 125
6.5 Summary 128
6.6 Discussion Questions 129
7 The Learner in MALL 130
7.1 Introduction 130
7.2 Identifying the Learner in MALL 131
x Contents
Published online by Cambridge University Press
7.3 Rationale for Training 134
7.4 Training, Sustained Task Engagement
and Autonomy 135
7.5 A Model of Training in MALL 141
7.5.1 Technical Training 141
7.5.2 Strategic Training 142
7.5.3 Pedagogical Training 143
7.6 Summary 145
7.7 Discussion Questions 147
8 Designing MALL Environments 148
8.1 Introduction 148
8.2 Designing Learning Environments 150
8.2.1 The ADDIE Approach 151
8.2.2 The Ecology of Resources Model 153
8.2.3 Conversational Framework 155
8.2.4 The iPAC Framework 156
8.2.5 Other Design Frameworks 157
8.3 Designing Artefacts 158
8.4 Designing Tasks 161
8.5 Designing Assessment in MALL 165
8.6 Principles for MALL Design 166
8.6.1 Understanding the Context 166
8.6.2 Becoming Familiar with
Available Resources 166
8.6.3 Making the Most of the Affordances of
the Device 167
8.6.4 Setting Feasible Learning Goals Suitable for
Mobile Devices 168
8.6.5 Predicting Technical Problems and
Preparing Support 168
8.6.6 Preparing Learners Adequately 169
8.6.7 Allowing for Alternatives 169
8.6.8 Understanding the Impact of Non-
learning Uses 170
8.6.9 Dealing with Distractions 170
8.6.10 Opening Channels of Communication 171
8.6.11 Experiencing MALL as a Learner 171
8.7 Summary 172
8.8 Discussion Questions 172
Contents xi
Published online by Cambridge University Press
9 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL 173
9.1 Introduction 173
9.2 Concepts in MALL 174
9.2.1 Lifelong Mobility 174
9.2.2 Interactivity 178
9.2.3 Agency and Sociomateriality 180
9.3 Contexts in MALL 184
9.3.1 Pluralistic Development of
MALL Contexts 184
9.3.2 Mobile Learning for Crisis Management 185
9.4 Challenges in MALL 189
9.4.1 The Nexus of Learner and
Teacher Training 189
9.4.2 Dealing with Evolving Technologies 191
9.5 Final Comments 192
Glossary 194
References 202
Index 239
xii Contents
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Figures
5.1 A dual systems theory model 104
5.2 Attribution-based theory of intrapersonal motivation 108
6.1 Physical issues of mobile learning 116
xiii
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Tables
3.1 Overview of teacher experience with training
in technology 50
5.1 Theories related to technology relevant to
MALL research 101
8.1 Underlying views of learning and associated practices
(adapted from van Lier, 2002, p. 142) 162
xiv
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Acknowledgements
Bringing this book to completion has been an extremely challenging
task, spanning more than a decade since the first conceptualisation of
the theme. The original ideas for this book came from a combination
of research, courses and lectures that I started giving more than a
decade ago, and I have been fortunate enough to see the evolution of
the field since its infancy. Mobile-assisted language learning has seen
tremendous shifts in the sophistication of the technologies, the
research designs, the pedagogies and even the perceptions towards
the field, and keeping ahead of these shifts has been one of the most
difficult parts of the journey.
There are so many people that I need to thank for their support and
advice along the way in completing this book. The advice of colleagues
at conferences has always been a tremendous help to me, and along
the way, there have been so many comments containing snippets of
information that seemed relatively insignificant at the time but that
ultimately impacted some aspect of the final product. While there are
just far too many people to mention here, some of the people that had
a particular influence on me are Mark Pegrum, Phil Hubbard and
Agnes Kukulska-Hulme, although they may not even have known that
they were influencing me at the time. The advice from the anonymous
reviewers who looked at the earlier and later versions of the manu-
script were simply invaluable, and I would like to sincerely thank you
for your insights, although the final product and any flaws in it are
completely my responsibility.
I cannot thank Becky Taylor and Izzie Collins from Cambridge
University Press enough for their warm encouragement and under-
standing as I struggled at different points. Thank you both so much
for your patience and thoughtfulness when I needed it most. You
always asked me about the manuscript at just the right time, and
you really helped guide me through to the end of this enormous
undertaking.
xv
Published online by Cambridge University Press
More than anyone else, I have nothing but gratitude for my wife,
Takana, who stood by me and believed in me during countless days
and far too many nights as I wrestled with difficult chapters and
sometimes almost lost hope myself. You were – and always are – a
strength to me more than you know, and I would never have been able
to complete it without you beside me.
xvi Acknowledgements
Published online by Cambridge University Press
Abbreviations
ADDIE Analyse, Design, Development, Implementation, and
Evaluation
ANT actor-network theory
BYOD bring your own device
CALL computer-assisted language learning
CST complex systems theory
DST dynamic systems theory
DVD digital video disc or digital versatile disk
ENIAC Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer
GPS Global Positioning Service
GSM Global System for Mobile Communication
HCI human–computer interaction
ICT information and communication technologies
iPAC personalisation, authenticity, collaboration
LMS learning management system
MALL mobile-assisted language learning
MOOC massive open online course
MP megapixel (an indicator of the quality of the resolution of a
picture)
MP3 MPEG (Motion Picture Experts Group) layer-3 (usually an
audio file)
MP4 MPEG (Motion Picture Experts Group) layer-4 (usually a
video file)
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
NFC near-field communication
PDA personal digital assistant
PMI physical mobile interaction
QR code quick response code
RAM random-access memory
SD card secure digital card
SLA second-language acquisition
SMS short message service
SNS social networking service
xvii
Published online by Cambridge University Press
TALL technology-assisted language learning
TAM technology acceptance model
TELL technology-enhanced language learning
TPACK technical, pedagogical, and content knowledge
USB Universal Serial Bus
UTAUT unified theory of acceptance and use of technology
xviii List of Abbreviations
Published online by Cambridge University Press
1 Introduction
1.1 Introduction
The use of technology in education has always been somewhat con-
troversial. This may seem like an unusual statement to make at the
start of a book that deals with the use of mobile technologies in
teaching and learning contexts, but pointing this observation out from
the outset helps to frame several of the relevant issues pertaining to the
acceptance – and resistance – of technology, including its position in
discussions of theoretical, empirical, and practical issues surrounding
its use. Although technology has featured more prominently in educa-
tion than could have possibly been imagined since the spread of the
COVID-19 virus at the beginning of 2020, there still remain strongly
divided opinions as to its long-term use as a viable option to quality
education rather than a stopgap until the world recovers from the
disaster. The controversy surrounding technology usage in education
is caused by a complex net of interrelated factors that are difficult to
explain in isolation of one another, and yet in some ways have shaped
the way that technology has come to be viewed in the larger educa-
tional context. This includes, to some degree, how it has been viewed
as an academic discipline. Attitudes towards technology have ranged
from enthusiastic or overly optimistic at one end of the spectrum to
critical or doubtful at the other, and these attitudes have both given
rise to and resulted from the controversies surrounding technology use
in education. Looking at these controversies and the reasons behind
them may lead to a more balanced view of technology – including, of
course, mobile technologies – in language teaching and learning to
form a more solid foundation on which to understand the concepts
and contexts, and to see how best to anticipate and deal with the
potential challenges.
Among the many controversies, perhaps the most obvious has
centred around pedagogical aspects. Since the beginning of the field
1
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
of computer-assisted language learning (CALL), discussions about the
effects of learning through technological versus non-technological
means have held prominence. Some practitioners have embraced new
technologies as they appear, while others have been more hesitant to
accept them. For some, technology is viewed as an integral part of
keeping up with the times (Hanna, Brown, Dede, Olcott, Poley,
Schmidt & Tallman, 2000; O’Flaherty & Phillips, 2015), where it is
seen as an indispensable tool that provides significant benefits for
teaching and learning. For others, however, such technologies are little
more than a gimmick, something that can be used to perk student
interest for a time but with little or no added real educational value, or
even detracting from valuable class time (Reid, 2014; Rogers-Estable,
2014). Depending on the ways in which technology is used, however,
both of these perspectives may actually be correct. Technology most
certainly does have the potential to add elements to a teaching and
learning environment that can enhance learning, but at the same time,
if technology is simply used for the sake of the technology itself
without careful planning and implementation, then the benefits for
learning can be so greatly diminished that non-use can be a more
effective option.
A second controversy is related to socioeconomic aspects. The
digital divide (i.e., the disparity that exists between those with access
to technologies and those without) has been a topic of discussion since
the 1990s. Widespread access to information and communications
technologies (ICT) was seen as being closely linked to socioeconomic
development, and the setting up of infrastructure to allow stable and
affordable Internet connections has been an ongoing challenge.
Mobile devices such as mobile phones and tablets have been seen as
potentially having an equalising effect, where mobile broadband has
made Internet access more available to users in less affluent regions
such as in Africa (Gillwald, 2017) and South America (Galperin,
2016). At the same time, however, debates have also taken place
surrounding the dangers of accentuating the digital divide, where users
around the world are spending considerably more money on commu-
nications than is stipulated in the statistics set out by the Broadband
Commission for Digital Development (2015, cited in Gillwald, 2017).
Although the digital divide has most widely been discussed at a
national or regional level, the discrepancy is also relevant at an insti-
tutional or even an individual level. Institutionally, such divisions can
result in a type of technological eliteness, where institutions that can
afford expensive technologies are somehow seen as providing better
services than those that with less advanced resources. It is not difficult
to see how this links to pedagogical concerns, with many institutions
2 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
feeling real or perceived pressure to provide similar levels of techno-
logical resource infrastructure in order to provide an image of a better
learning experience for learners (O’Callaghan, Neumann, Jones &
Creed, 2017). While it would be difficult to draw a direct link to
confirm whether wider access to technologies will necessarily result
in better learning outcomes, it is also difficult to argue that there is no
relationship either, and having greater access to technology does seem
to provide greater opportunities for learning if it is used appropriately.
That is to say, if learners have access to technology, there is at least
the chance for learning to take place, but this is based heavily on how
the technology is used. It is individually, however, that we may see the
greatest impact of mobile learning with regard to the digital divide.
Requiring learners to use their own mobile devices for education can
impart burdens upon those in less advantaged socioeconomic circum-
stances than their peers, which can cause stress and/or embarrassment
to them, feelings of inferiority, and potentially even detrimental
impacts on motivation to engage in learning through their mobile
devices at all.
Thirdly, there is academic controversy, one that somehow views
CALL as a lesser field to the broader parent fields of second-language
acquisition and information technology. CALL has often been
branded as lacking in theoretical foundation and academic rigour,
and while there may have been some evidence of this in the early days
of CALL research, there is also an extremely solid foundation of well-
conceived and well-conducted research that has made a significant
contribution to our understanding of other fields as well. A seminal
article by Coleman (2005) drew attention to this issue, indicating that
CALL has often lacked the “mutual respect” (p. 20) of other fields,
evidenced by publications in CALL journals citing research from
respected SLA journals but very little evidence of the reverse. More
than a decade after this observation, the trend still seems to stand
largely true, as seen by the lack of references to CALL-related jour-
nals in articles that have a similar focus but do not use technology.
Technology can provide relevant data on language teaching and
learning and insights that are made possible only through the adop-
tion of technology (Blake, 2000). Despite the fact that disseminating
research in CALL journals has become increasingly competitive and
publishing in high-ranking journals in the field is now considered
extremely difficult, the image clearly persists of CALL research as
being somehow less rigorous than other, more “established” fields
(Leakey, 2011), and it is difficult to predict when or if it will be put
on a similar standing with research in SLA or other educational
fields.
1.1 Introduction 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Finally, technologies have been a part of administrative contro-
versy, where pressures have been placed on teachers – and ultimately
learners – to use new technologies, frequently with little explanation
or support provided, and input in the selection of technological
resources is often not sought from the teachers who will actually be
expected to use them. The underlying reasons for technology adoption
by administrators are, no doubt, complex and have ranged from
actual or anticipated cost-cutting, promotion of institutional image,
and betterment of the teaching and learning environment, although
the real benefits in each of these regards have been somewhat ques-
tionable (Bowen, Chingos, Lack & Nygren, 2014; McPherson &
Bacow, 2015). There have been, of course, multiple unanticipated
outcomes from the introduction of technology by administration,
some of which are more positive and others more negative.
Positively, aside from the benefits associated with support for learning
itself through technology, in some ways, it has made the exchange of
information among administrators, teachers, and learners more trans-
parent, where the channels of communication are somewhat more
open than in the past. Negatively, the relative ease with which tech-
nology makes collecting and analysing data also means that teachers
may be subjected to more frequent centrally administered online
evaluations. While evaluations in themselves may not necessarily be
problematic, they do have the potential to place greater pressure on
teachers to strive towards higher evaluation scores (Lejonberg, Elstad
& Christophersen, 2018), which may or may not be an accurate
picture of better teaching. Moreover, evaluations may even contribute
to less willingness to experiment or to be innovative in order to avoid
potential failures (e.g., Bennett, Dawson, Bearman, Molloy & Boud,
2017; Carless, 2009).
The cost issue has always been a contentious one, and attempts to
use technology to save money inevitably result in shifts towards other
expenses such as maintenance of the technologies and hiring sufficient
support staff to ensure that these technologies run smoothly (Reid,
2014). The quality of education that is provided by technologies
designed to replace the teacher has consistently drawn debate from
many stakeholders – administrators, teachers, students, and even
parents – with claims by many commercial providers that their prod-
ucts are comparable with human teachers that are difficult to substan-
tiate in actual practice. Apart from the oversimplification of the role of
the teacher as little more than a provider of content and feedback,
claiming that technology can completely replace human teachers
largely ignores the myriad human interactions that are an integral part
of learning in virtually all aspects of life. This argument itself brings us
4 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
back to the pedagogical controversy, which in turn clearly illustrates
the interrelatedness of the various factors at play regarding technology
in education.
Early CALL practitioners lamented the lack of appropriate teaching
materials, software, and trained staff, likening these problems to those
of the language laboratories which preceded them (Higgins & Johns,
1984). Indeed, the lessons that were to be learned from language
laboratories were still painfully evident in much of the literature
written at the time about using computers in language learning.
Claims from CALL research also closely paralleled these concerns,
and researchers were often in one of two camps: on the one hand, a
lack of computers where learners competed with one another to
use the limited machines available to them (Fitzgerald, Hattie &
Hughes, 1985), and on the other, an over-prevalence of computers
which remain underused due to insufficient skilled teachers and the
paucity of appropriate teaching resources (Cuban, 2002; Dunkel,
1987). In recent years, we have an abundance of materials and tech-
nologies – particularly with most learners having their own devices –
but a lack of infrastructure to ensure that these are used properly,
meaning that these materials are often not being used in a time- and
cost-effective manner.
These examples are far from exhaustive, but they do serve to give us
some insights into the controversies that are involved in the adoption
and integration of technology in language teaching and learning, of
which technology itself is just one factor, and possibly even the factor
which is most easily controlled. With the wider use of mobile devices
such as mobile phones, smartphones, and wearable technologies
appearing in language teaching and learning, these controversies still
exist in many shapes and forms. Pedagogical factors remain central,
with some believing that mobile learning is the answer to problems
that occurred beforehand. This is a concern that was expressed by Bax
(2003) about virtually any new technology in language teaching con-
texts, well before mobile learning started to enter the mainstream (see
Stockwell & Reinders, 2019, for a discussion). Mobile learning has
long attracted the interest of teachers and administrators, but peda-
gogy has generally lagged behind the prospects of what it might
become. Even now, we see people who are considering using mobile
learning ask what app to use, devoid of any contextual information.
This question shows a lack of appreciation for the complexity of the
field and is akin to asking what language textbook should be used
without specifying the skills to be targeted, the level of the students, or
the relationship with other elements of a course of study. MALL – like
CALL – really does seem bound in expectations that it will make
1.1 Introduction 5
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
teaching and learning easier, provided the appropriate app, software,
or website can be located. Of course, this view is not universal, but
from my experiences with talking about MALL around the world, this
very is indicative of the type of questions that I am frequently asked.
From the Field: The Digital Divide
I recall that several years ago, all of the students in one of my classes had
smartphones, apart from one. I was not aware of this initially, as all students
had responded that they owned smartphones in an informal survey about the
technologies that they owned in the first class of the semester. I asked
students to try to use materials that they could access through their mobile
phones in class, but this one student declined, looking only at his textbook.
After class, he came to me and said that he did not have a smartphone as it
was too expensive for him to afford the initial contract cost and the monthly
charges, and he only owned a GSM phone so that he could keep in contact
with their parents as necessary. I assured him that the materials functioned
quite well on GSM phones, but the student said that he felt embarrassed to
be seen using his older phone in front of the other students. Eventually, he
did engage in a small proportion of the activities on his mobile phone, but
I learned a valuable lesson as a teacher that day about the dangers of making
assumptions regarding the technologies that our learners possess and their
feelings about feeling inferior because they can’t afford the technologies
owned by their peers.
1.2 The Nature of MALL
The spread of mobile devices has taken place at an enormous rate,
with contracts for Internet connections through mobile phones sur-
passing those of desktop computers from as early 2012 (see Pegrum,
2014, for a detailed overview). Mobile devices have become an every-
day part of the lives of many people in their social, work, consumerist,
and entertainment agendas (Castells, Fernández-Ardèvol, Qiu & Sey,
2007), to the extent that many people – particularly young adults –
would find it difficult to survive without them (Burnell & Kuther,
2016). Mobile devices have in many ways become an extension of
our bodies. We carry mobile devices – now most commonly smart-
phones, but also tablets or even wearable technologies – with us at
nearly every waking moment (and as an increasingly common prob-
lem and to the detriment of the quality of our sleep, many people have
them near their bedside even while sleeping). The fact that they are
almost always close at hand is obviously one point that has made them
6 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
a target for educators, but if we are to consider how they might be
used effectively in learning contexts, we also need to think about what
it is about these mobile technologies that makes them such a central
part of our everyday lives. Carr (2011) suggests that technologies may
be roughly divided up into four main categories: (1) an extension of
our physical strength, dexterity, or resilience; (2) an extension of the
range or sensitivity of our senses; (3) a way of enabling us to reshape
nature to better serve our needs or desires; and (4) a way to extend or
support our mental powers. Mobile devices may take on any one of
these roles in some way, but the most obvious links to language
learning would be their ability to extend the range of our senses
(such as enabling us to communicate with others at a distance) and
extending or supporting our mental powers (through acting as a
notebook, a camera, a dictionary, or a search engine, to name but a
few). This ready access enables learners to “exploit small amounts of
time and space for learning” (Traxler, 2007, p. 8), but exploiting these
times and spaces requires learners to make learning a part of their
everyday schedule, where they can take advantage of times that may
previously have been wasted. In other words, if learners carry their
mobile devices with them to both learning and non-learning locations,
they will have greater opportunity for engaging in learning activities, if
only they decide to make the most of them.
The portability of mobile devices makes possible another potential
benefit helping to contextualise learning – that is, to make learning
relevant to the specific situations that learners find themselves on a
day-to-day basis (Stockwell, 2014). In other words, the attractiveness
of mobile learning is that it not only allows learners to spend more
time engaging in learning tasks, but also that these tasks can be made
to relate to actual experiences to make them more meaningful to each
individual learner. Having access to mobile devices that can provide
information means that unexpected or unplanned learning situations,
such as needing to explain something in the target language to some-
one on the street, can be taken advantage of by seeking and immedi-
ately using this information in authentic contexts. In addition to
portability, mobile devices also allow improved opportunities for
communication. The fact that mobile devices are typically associated
with various social activities of users throughout the day also makes
them attractive to attempt to exploit this social element of learning (see
Ushioda, 2011). Furthermore, the flexibility and multimodal and non-
linear possibilities of mobile devices make them ideal for learners to
adjust them to their own particular learning times, spaces, preferences,
and goals (Kress & Pachler, 2007). In all, mobile devices, theoretically
at the very least, seem to be an ideal tool in which to make language
1.2 The Nature of MALL 7
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learning more accessible and relevant to learners. However, the prob-
lem is that this has also led to expectations that have often preceded
actual empirical outcomes.
This brings us to ask what mobile-assisted language learning really
is, how it is perceived, and what these expectations that are held about
it actually are. Pegrum (2019) proposes that the “mobile” part of
mobile learning may relate not only to mobile devices but also to
mobile learners and mobile learning experiences. Although the general
perception of mobile learning is typically bound to the use of mobile
devices, those devices can, of course, be linked to the mobility of
learners and their experiences (mobility is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 9). Thus, in the context of this book, MALL refers to learning
a second or foreign language1 through the use of one or more of
various mobile devices including, but not restricted to, mobile phones
(including smartphones), tablets, personal digital assistants (PDAs),
MP3/MP4 players, electronic dictionaries, and gaming consoles. The
definition of what is actually included in the list of mobile devices has
been surprisingly difficult to determine. Some have contended that the
list might include laptop computers (Kukulska-Hulme & Shield,
2008), while others have argued against this (van’t Hoof & Vahey,
2007). On this issue, Puentedura’s description (cited in Pegrum, 2014)
provides a useful distinction between mobile and portable devices,
where portable devices are typically used at Point A, closed down,
and then used again at Point B, whereas mobile devices can be used at
Point A, Point B, and anywhere in between if so desired.
A commonly held view of MALL by laypersons is that it refers
exclusively to the use of these mobile devices in “outside” locations
when the user is in transit or, using the previous example, when
learners are at somewhere between Point A and Point B. This is, of
course, a common use of mobile devices, but research has shown that
many learners opt to use them at home, even when other technologies
are available (e.g., Stockwell & Liu, 2015). MALL can also be used to
refer to the use of these devices inside the classroom, where learners
use mobile devices to carry out certain learning tasks or activities.
These devices may be provided by the teacher for the duration of the
task or activity, or learners may use their own devices – such as using
their own phones, tablets, other similar devices. Thus, I would argue
that learning through mobile devices does not necessarily need to refer
1 It could be argued that MALL, like CALL, could also include learning of the first language,
but this type of inclusion in extremely rare in the literature. For this reason, MALL has
been limited to the learning of a second language in both second and foreign language
contexts only in this book.
8 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to learning on the move, and that using mobile devices such as
smartphones or tablets at home is still very much a part of mobile
learning in that the users feel the devices they are using are a part of
their toolkit of resources that they may choose from for learning. The
distinction between the mobility or portability of devices may end up
being a moot point. We are starting to see a merge between different
devices that were once considered to be separate entities, such as
laptops and tablets, where the functionalities are overlapping.
Laptops are exhibiting the features that were once associated with
tablets, for example a touchscreen; and tablets and even smartphones
are becoming used more widely for functions that might have been in
the realm of laptop and desktop computers – such as word processing,
creating spreadsheets, or other office-related uses.
Defining specific devices for mobile learning is becoming increas-
ingly more difficult. Emerging wearable technologies, most notably
watches and other devices like Google GlassTM, would also be classi-
fied as mobile devices, and although there is only a limited amount of
research on wearable technologies for language learning at the time of
writing (de la Guía, Lopez Camacho, Orozco-Barbosa, Brea Luján,
Penichet & Lozano Pérez, 2016), the potential is certainly evident
(Bower & Sturman, 2015; Sykes, 2018). These devices typically
require an interface with another mobile device such as a smartphone
or tablet (although there are some devices that can operate with an
independent Internet connection), so the correlation with or depend-
ence on other technologies would need to remain in the consideration
of the factors in their use. Furthermore, implanted technologies would
be considered as mobile in that they must naturally be carried inside
the body with the user at all times, but at this stage, research is limited
to assistive technologies such as for people suffering from hearing
disorders (e.g., Beeres-Scheenstra, Ohnsorg, Candreia, Heinzmann,
Castellanos, De Min & Linder, 2017). These are areas where mobile
learning is likely to continue to develop in the future, and they are
discussed in more depth in Chapter 9.
The ways in which mobile devices are selected and used will vary
considerably depending on the functionality and availability of tech-
nology – as well as the experiences, skills, goals, attitudes, and prefer-
ences of the multiple participants in the individual context such as the
teachers, learners, and administrators. This is obviously an enormous
issue, and it takes up a large portion of this book, but specific
examples of designing for MALL are included in Chapter 8. As
already described, one of the goals of MALL activities is to take
learning outside of the classroom and into reality, where learners can
not only take advantage of those gaps in time and space but also take
1.2 The Nature of MALL 9
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
their learning into the world; other goals of MALL activities include
personalising learning for ‘learners’ own needs (Kukulska-Hulme,
2016); interacting with the environment using wireless, GPS, or QR
code functions (e.g., Chen, Liu and Hwang, 2015); providing infor-
mation suited to specific situations through context awareness
(e.g., Santos, Saneiro, Boticario and Rodriguez-Sanchez (2016); and
expanding upon computer-based activities to keep content fresh in
learners’ minds (e.g., Sharples, 2014). At the same time, MALL also
strives to enrich activities inside the classroom. Learners can have
access to learning resources (de la Fuente, 2014) and authentic mater-
ials (Ducate & Lomicka, 2013), or teachers can augment existing
paper-based materials by providing links to multimedia that can
enable a more interactive experience (Solak & Cakır, 2015), to name
a few of the potential in-class uses. While these are just a sample of the
types of activities that might be included in MALL, it is evident that
MALL should encompass more than just delivering simplified and
somewhat colourless content and activities on mobile devices as a
substitute for computer- or paper-based versions (Squire, 2009).
MALL can be highly dynamic, creative, and personalised if carefully
planned and implemented, and it is this potential that should drive
educators to explore how they can use it in their teaching and
learning environments.
Needless to say, mobile learning does not mean that learning must
be limited only to the device which is being used to engage in tasks
or activities. The mobile devices may be used in conjunction with
other non-mobile devices, and also with more traditional non-
technological means, such as paper-based resources and materials.
This can be seen through mobile devices being used to augment
reality (see Godwin-Jones, 2016), such as enabling learners to inter-
act with materials or even places around them, even with limited
technological skills. This can even be achieved through using mobile
resources that act as a supplement to paper-based or other materials,
such as audio- or video-based resources that can also be used
together with a textbook or other paper-based materials. Of course,
mobile technologies can be used to support other activities through
other devices like computers which have larger screens and key-
boards that are easier for reading or typing, by acting as a resource
such as a dictionary, reference tool, communication device, or an
audio or video player. In this way, MALL is becoming a multimodal,
multiplatform experience where the learner is interacting with mul-
tiple technological and non-technological options as a larger part of
their learning experience.
10 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
1.3 Understanding MALL
Four years after the release of the first smartphones in 2007 (the LG
Prada was followed by the iPhone in the same year), Traxler (2011)
perceptively described mobile devices as “curiously both pervasive and
ubiquitous, both conspicuous and unobtrusive, both noteworthy and
taken-for-granted in the lives of most people” (p. 25). Although it has
been more than a decade since this statement was made, it has become
even more relevant now than it was when smartphones were just
starting to find their place into our everyday lives. As educational
applications of MALL increase, we are starting to see that these
conflicting views still exist, and even though the mobile devices them-
selves are becoming more ubiquitous, there is both resistance and
scepticism with regards to how they can be used effectively. The
impact of technology is indeed unobtrusive in that we use devices
these days with little thought of picking them up to find information
or to communicate with others, but when educational purposes
become the target, then there must necessarily be some degree of
thought that goes into deciding what to use and how to go about
doing it in order to achieve some learning outcome. For self-directed
learning purposes, it may include making decisions about what app to
use and how to use it (see Chapter 7), but even if tools have been
assigned to learners, they are still faced with decisions and dilemmas
about how, when, and where – and even why – they should use it, and
how this fits into their daily or weekly schedule of private and educa-
tional uses of their mobile devices.
The impression that one often gets when talking about MALL is that
it is viewed as being some kind of constant, as though MALL can be
considered as a single teaching approach. As is described in Chapter 2,
MALL is seen largely as being for self-study through apps, which does
not take into account the complexities of what can be done through
mobile devices based on the enormous range of technical functions that
are now available. MALL can range from being a means for searching
for information through a search engine on a mobile phone (Gu, 2016)
or as an electronic dictionary (Levy & Steel, 2015) to using a dedicated
vocabulary app like Quizlet (Tran, 2018), QR codes to promote inter-
action between students in class (Rivers, 2009), recording videos to
develop presentation skills (Toland, Mills & Kohyama, 2016), to name
a few. This small sample of the types of studies that can be carried out
using mobile phones gives some insight into the complexities involved
and the difficulties in referring to mobile learning as any kind of
homogeneous type of learning. Surveys that ask learners about their
attitudes towards so-called mobile learning have little to no meaning if
1.3 Understanding MALL 11
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
there is not some kind of supplementary information that can clarify
what activities, as it is likely that most learners will possess very differ-
ent attitudes towards different types of activities and tasks. MALL is a
constantly evolving mixture of factors that capitalise on the various
affordances inherent to each device and the new hardware and software
that are developed over time. As a result, MALL refers to something
that is fluid, and it is next to impossible to encapsulate it in a single term.
In this way, when MALL is used in this book, it is describing a broad
spectrum of activities and tasks that are tailored to different technolo-
gies, abilities, and contexts.
In understanding what MALL is, it also is helpful to consider also
what it is not. As touched upon before, MALL is more than just a
means for learners to engage in individual self-study, although it is
often viewed that way by many who are contemplating using mobile
technologies as a part of their teaching and learning environments. In
one sense, this perspective is an example of a parallel that exists
between CALL and MALL. Just as CALL often conjures images of
self-study in front of a computer, MALL is envisaged as being pre-
dominantly dedicated language learning apps. In one sense, the image
of mobile learning as equating with apps is probably not that surpris-
ing, given that apps are one of the most visible aspects of our current
mobile devices. It is true that pretty much everything that happens
through mobile devices is indeed done through apps, such as launch-
ing web browsers, social media, office tools, music, and even cameras.
As described before, however, MALL is far more than this, and using
mobile technologies opens up a whole world of interactive and social
possibilities that can enrich the learning process qualitatively
and quantitatively.
I would argue that MALL is not fundamentally different from
CALL. There are some who might disagree with this statement, but
thinking through what MALL is can help to make sense of this
perspective. As with CALL, the ultimate aim of using technologies is
to enhance the various language skills (namely, writing, listening, and
speaking) and language areas (such as vocabulary, grammar, pronun-
ciation, fluency, and so forth) that go into making a person into a
proficient user of a language. The similarities lie not only in the
ultimate aims of teaching and learning a language but also with the
expectations for their impact on the learning process and the fact that
they allow for instant access to a range of multimodal learning mater-
ials, social communities, and immediate and personalised feedback. As
described earlier, they have also been through a similar path of evolu-
tion that makes them the target of comparisons with other methods, as
will be described further in Chapter 4.
12 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
There are, however, a number of considerations that do need to be
kept in mind in order to understand how to make the most of mobile
technologies from the perspectives of both teaching and research.
Firstly, the affordances of mobile devices need to be considered. Put
simply, the term affordances is used to connote what something
makes possible (see Norman, 2013) and is often used to refer to the
technical functionality of the device, but it can also include environ-
mental factors and the perceptions of how the device will be used (see
Chapter 2 for a discussion). There are naturally going to be differences
in the affordances of mobile devices from various other technologies
such as computers (and, of course, variations between different mobile
devices as well), so understanding the impact of these affordances can
contribute to understanding what device or devices are most suited to
a particular environment. Secondly, realising that mobile learning in
recent years has relied heavily on people using their own devices
means that there is a need to be aware of the differences between what
learners will be carrying with them in terms of both hardware and
software. This has, of course, happened with CALL to some degree
now too, with many institutions opting to reduce self-access computer
laboratories to cut maintenance and running costs as more students
carry their own laptops, but many institutions still opt to keep com-
puter rooms for class learning. Thirdly, tracking what learners do with
mobile devices both inside and outside of the classroom is rather more
difficult when learners are using their own devices. Computers in
classrooms may have tracking software installed for research or learn-
ing purposes, but it becomes decidedly more difficult to track usage
with learners’ personal mobile devices. Finally, using mobile devices
for assessment can be a challenge, particularly in classroom situations.
A mobile may be used as a “replacement” for the computer in carrying
out some activities, but their use in some forms of assessment may be
difficult. The teacher may be able to keep a watchful eye on learners’
interactions with computers either directly or through computer lab
management software, but mobile devices may require a more vigilant
approach. In saying this, ways of preventing cheating through mobile
devices are also starting to emerge. The issues of using the tracking and
assessment with mobile devices will be dealt with in more detail in
Chapter 8, but there are obviously underlying issues regarding how
learners use their devices that also need consideration. Tracking does
make it possible to see not only when but also how students are doing
required tasks or homework outside of class. Server access logs can allow
teachers to see learner behaviour in doing tasks or homework, but that
has also made it possible to see that many learners simply complete
tasks without considering the reasons for doing so (Fischer, 2012).
1.3 Understanding MALL 13
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Looking at both the product and the process can reveal rather
undesirable engagement patterns, often because learners are just
not aware of the reasons for doing these tasks and activities,
which makes the value in requiring them to do so in the first place
somewhat questionable (Palardy, 1988; Wallinger, 2000). Thus, an
unexpected outcome of the affordances of technology is it can provide
a window into learner behaviour that can lead teachers to reconsider
their practice.
A term that is often misunderstood is ubiquitous learning.
Ubiquitous learning is often used interchangeably with the term
mobile learning, but these two terms refer to overlapping but quite
different concepts. Looking at the meaning of these two terms indi-
vidually sheds light on the difference; mobile means something that is
on the move whereas ubiquitous means that something exists every-
where. Mobile learning, then, is most commonly used to refer to using
mobile devices to engage in learning on the move, but as described
earlier, it is also used to encompass using mobile devices in fixed
locations as well. In contrast, ubiquitous learning means having access
to learning technologies in whatever location the learner might be in,
and this may include a combination of both mobile and non-mobile
devices. In ubiquitous learning, the learner can use multiple devices
that share data and information seamlessly between them, such as may
be seen with cloud computing, while mobile learning is most com-
monly carried out on devices that are carried by the learner, which
may or may not access this shared data or information. In this sense,
mobile learning might be considered as a part – albeit an important
one – of ubiquitous learning, where it makes up the range of tools that
are available for the learner to remain connected to the learning
environment. Where there may be limitations caused by the affor-
dances of a mobile device, they can be compensated for by using other
technologies, and at the same time, learners may be able to pick up
where they left off using a less-mobile technology such as a desktop or
laptop computer to continue engaging with learning content or others.
It is evident that the affordances of mobile devices make it impractical
to be the only electronic device to be used language learning in terms
of screen size, text input, storage, and battery issues (Stockwell, 2016),
so embedding mobile learning into the larger context where it comple-
ments other tools and devices would seem to be a preferable way to
keep learners engaged in learning in various shapes and forms, which
logically would point to the conclusion that MALL is an essential part
of ubiquitous learning and vice versa.
The preceding discussion provides a very brief introduction to some
of the key issues associated with mobile learning, gives some insights
14 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
into what mobile-assisted language learning is (and what it is not), and
points out a number of key issues that will be discussed in more depth
in later chapters. The remainder of this chapter provides an overview
of each of the chapters in the book.
From the Field: Mobility in MALL
The image that is held of MALL, and indeed the main “selling point” of it, is
that learners will take advantage of short moments in the middle of their busy
schedule to engage in small snippets of learning (sometimes called “micro-
learning” or “atomised learning,” as described in Chapter 8). Theoretically,
this is a wonderful concept – and one that is thought to be suited to learners
with shrinking attention spans – but it is based on assumptions that do not
seem to hold true as often as teachers might hope. In my experience, the
reasons for this appear to be that when learners are in positions that might
be considered as mobile (in transit or even in a café or other location that
they temporarily occupy), the distractions inherent to such locations make it
difficult to concentrate sufficiently on the tasks they are trying to engage in.
The problems of returning one’s attention to a learning activity after even just
a few minutes away from it mean that there is inevitably going to be some
lead-in time to prepare before any meaningful learning can take place.
Looking at many of my own learners has shown that they also come to this
realisation. Learners with longer commutes on public transport do, in fact,
take advantage of this time, but for the most part, many learners seem to
seek quieter locations where they can spend quality time on learning activ-
ities, even if they use their mobile devices. This does not necessarily mean
that learners do not use the small snippets in time on occasion, but it
seems that learners become aware of the limitations of trying to learn in
short bursts and favour locations such as their own homes, where they can
engage for longer periods without interruption.
1.4 Overview of the Book
Apart from this introductory chapter, there are eight chapters in this
book, including the Conclusion – which brings together the various
discussions raised throughout the book to address the title of this
book, considering the concepts, the contexts, and challenges.
Chapter 2 considers parallels between CALL and MALL and outlines
how the technological affordances of various devices affects the ways
in which they are used to achieve specific goals. It then describes the
interrelationships among technology, research, practice, and theory. It
outlines the evolution of mobile technologies and emphasises the
1.4 Overview of the Book 15
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
importance of moving from affordance-based practice through to
pedagogy-based practice as technologies move through the hype cycle
(cf. Gartner, 2016). The issue of push and pull modes associated with
mobile technologies is outlined here, along with the ability of mobile
devices to interact with other devices through a range of networking
functions, the potential for mixed reality learning and context sensitive
learning, and the use of other functions such as cameras and audio
recorders for language learning. The chapter continues by pointing out
some of the limitations of research on technology use in language
education and then considers some of the complexities of both theory
and practice in MALL in order to lay the foundations for the
later chapters.
The main thrust of Chapter 3 is to discuss how dramatically teach-
ing and learning are changing, largely as a result of developments in
technology. These changes have brought about shifts in the roles of the
teachers, of learners, and even of the technologies themselves. Not
only do teachers have to manage their teaching environments, but they
also need to manage their technological skills and the emotional load
that goes along with the pressures of maintaining digital literacy.
Learners are faced with having greater expectations to use technology,
while at the same time it is expected that they are already skilled in
using technologies for learning purposes. It explores the possible
future directions of education, where teachers and learners need to
consider not only what information needs to be learned but also what
information is acceptable to be referenced. They also need to develop
skills in evaluating information from the enormous amount of avail-
able resources. The chapter also explores the view of teaching and
learning in formal and informal contexts and looks at how mobile
technologies have impacted both of these learning situations. It deals
with the emerging concept of mobile literacy, outlining what learners
should be aware of when engaging in learning and non-learning
activities on their mobile devices. Finally, given that mobile devices
are constantly “switched on” and generally carried almost constantly
by learners, the chapter discusses the issue of motivating learners to
take advantage of their devices to engage in activities that are associ-
ated with learning languages.
Research into MALL has proven to be somewhat complex when
compared with much of the earlier research in the field of CALL,
which is the focus of Chapter 4. The reasons for this are twofold.
Firstly, by the nature of the device, there is an expectation that a
significant proportion of learning through mobile devices will take
place out of class. While this does not preclude using devices in
classroom settings (and there have been several very interesting studies
16 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that have looked at the use of mobile devices in class), it is exponen-
tially more difficult to determine how learners are using their mobile
devices in uncontrolled and unsupervised settings. Secondly, learners
are typically using their own devices, although early studies into
mobile devices typically involved using loaned PDAs or even iPads,
whereas similar data for mobile devices owned by learners is not
available because it is not logistically possible to install tracking
software on them. Learner usage data then will need to take the form
of data that can be stored on a central server or reported data, each of
which face potential limitations. Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to
outline the difficulties involved with undertaking research in MALL as
well as describing various innovative approaches that have been
undertaken, illustrated through appropriate recent examples from
the literature.
Chapter 5 deals with theory in MALL. Discussions of the role of
theory in CALL have been rather limited to date and have typically
relied heavily on second-language acquisition (SLA) theories or other
theories related to learning and pedagogy. This in itself is not particu-
larly surprising or inappropriate, but there has been very little discus-
sion of the role of technology in the learning process. The majority of
the work that considers theory relating to technology to date has
revolved around the multimodality that modern technologies make
possible. This has included looking at the cognitive load associated
with each mode and how access to information through different
channels can facilitate learning. These aspects are equally relevant in
MALL, but there are added elements with using mobile devices that
must also be taken into consideration. These include the way in which
technologies can be used as an ongoing reference tool, where users can
look up information quickly and easily rather than committing them
to memory. These aspects were also relevant to a far lesser degree
through non-mobile devices, but the more frequent the access we have
to mobile technologies, the more likely we are to pick them up to seek
out information rather than attempting to retrieve information already
stored in our memories. This has an impact not only on theories of
learning but most certainly on theories of pedagogy.
Chapter 6 explores the physical, psychosocial, and pedagogical
issues associated with MALL. The physical characteristics of mobile
devices such as the size of the screen and the input methods have long
been an issue when considering their applicability for learning, but
these have often been considered as a necessary trade-off in order to
maintain their portability. In addition to this, however, there are also
psychosocial issues considering the position of mobile devices in the
minds of the learners and teachers, such as a personal tool for private
1.4 Overview of the Book 17
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
uses or a tool that can be applied to any use as required. This percep-
tion of mobile devices is often a product of the social context in which
they are used, and this will likely vary depending on the region, the
socioeconomic status, and the age group of the users. Furthermore, the
dangers in distractions both inside and outside of the device are
described here along the psychological impact of mobile devices on
learners’ abilities to concentrate on multiple tasks. Finally, the chapter
discusses the issue of pedagogy when learning through mobile devices
and the factors that may be thought to contribute to successfully
achieving learning goals and sustaining task engagement. The details
of research studies that look at the impact of each of these elements
are described.
The ultimate user of MALL is the learner, which is the main focus of
Chapter 7. Learner agency is an issue that helps us to gain a better
understanding of how and why learners are or are not able to make
appropriate choices applicable to their learning. Agency may be
related to individual characteristics of the learner, but it may also
be supported by proxy or collective agency from the teacher or larger
environment. Even learners who exhibit agency experience difficulties
in making appropriate choices about their learning, which is why
learner training is essential. In MALL, learner training is key in ensur-
ing that learners understand the reasons for engaging in mobile activ-
ities as well as what is expected of them from teachers. Stockwell and
Hubbard (2014, 2015) provided evidence that ongoing training in
technological, strategic, and pedagogical aspects can have a very
powerful effect on the ways in which learners view mobile and engage
in learning activities, Thus, the chapter argues for ongoing training
that guides learners to develop autonomy through evaluation of the
strategies they employ and sharing their learning experience with
others to help them reflect on their learning.
Chapter 8 explores the concept of design in MALL. Design can take
place at multiple levels, starting with the larger learning environment,
through to the digital artefacts that are used by learners and the design
of tasks for using the artefacts within the given environment. Some of
the key models of general design of the learning environment, arte-
facts, and tasks are provided with examples of how they relate directly
to MALL. The complexities of designing assessment are also dis-
cussed. The chapter concludes with basic guidelines to bear in mind
when designing a MALL and outlines a list of principles for the
successful implementation of mobile devices in language teaching
and learning contexts.
Finally, Chapter 9 brings together the arguments covered in the
previous eight chapters and returns to the title of the book: concepts,
18 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
contexts, and challenges. The concepts that need to be kept in mind for
the future of mobile learning are explored, along with the impact of
the context on language teaching and learning through mobile tech-
nologies. Along with these, the current and prospective challenges are
also investigated, with a view to seeing how these challenges can be
overcome to make the most of what MALL can be. The potential
future directions in which mobile learning may be considered to evolve
will also be discussed here, not in terms of evolving technologies, but
ways that the field seems to be headed and how these can relate to
meaningful research and practice that is needed in both the short and
longer term.
There are an enormous number of issues associated with mobile
learning that could have been covered in this book, and while I have
attempted to give attention to what I consider to be the main issues,
there are obviously other issues that are emerging at the time of
writing and different viewpoints and perspectives that others may feel
strongly about from their own individual experiences. Mobile-assisted
language learning varies in so many ways, depending on the attitudes,
skills, and preferences of learners, teachers, administrators, and other
stakeholders in the learning context to the various technologies that
may be used, the networking environment, availability of resources,
the language being studied, social expectations, and the list continues.
This diversity contributes to the ever-changing nature of the field and
has also brought about some extremely creative and even ingenious
uses of different mobile technologies. It is hoped that this book will
spark an interest in what mobile-assisted language learning can be
while, at the same time, allowing potential adopters of mobile tech-
nologies to embark on their journey with their eyes open to the
benefits and dangers that might be associated with MALL. It is becom-
ing quite undeniable that mobile-assisted language learning will be a
part of most language learning environments in some shape or form as
time goes by, so having an idea of what has been done and what we
still need to investigate further can help to lead towards meaningful
research and practice.
1.5 Discussion Questions
1. Do you see the digital divide as being problematic within your own
teaching or learning context? Why or why not? If so, how might
this be dealt with specifically in your context?
2. How would describe what MALL is in a sentence? How would you
respond to questions about the best apps for language learning?
1.5 Discussion Questions 19
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
3. In what way would you see MALL as being different from
CALL? Do you think that this difference is important? Why or
why not?
4. What would you include in a list of devices that would be appro-
priate for MALL? Give a rationale for each of these. Are there any
mobile devices that you would not include? Why?
20 Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
2 Fundamental Considerations of
Teaching with Mobile Technologies
2.1 Introduction
MALL has already been in existence for nearly two decades at the time
of writing, and mobile devices have undergone an enormous shift in
capabilities since they first came onto the market in the early 1990s.
The primary function of the first generation of mobile phones (often
referred to as “bricks” due to their large, blocky shapes) was to enable
telephone calls where people were not constrained to a single location,
and for the first time, they made it possible to send text-based mes-
sages to others without the need for a fixed landline with a fax or
telegraph. This provided people, particularly those in small businesses,
with an extremely liberating tool, and marked the beginning of com-
munication in “any place” and at “any time.” It was not until mobile
phones reduced in size and included a texting feature that the potential
of using them for a wider range of function – including learning
functions – became more of a logistical reality. Ownership of mobile
phones with these functions did increase, but during the late 1990s,
they were still only slowly entering the market for university-level
students. SMS texting was an increasingly common way of communi-
cating, although in some countries such as Japan, texting was rather
late to appear, with mobile-to-mobile emails being the primary text-
based communication tool.
Of course, it should also be remembered that mobile phones were not
the only mobile devices to develop through the 1990s and early 2000s;
portable MP3 players, electronic dictionaries, PDAs, small netbook
computers and laptop computers also became more commonplace.
From around this time, research that looked at how these devices,
particularly MP3 players and electronic dictionaries, could be used
appeared, and a view of how they could be applied to certain aspects
of language teaching and learning became apparent. The primary
functions that became possible as a result of these technological
21
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
developments were the ability to listen to audio, both authentic mater-
ials and materials that were prepared for learning purposes, and the
ability to stop, pause and listen again to these resources became pos-
sible. Electronic dictionaries also allowed learners to add an audio
component to hear the pronunciation of words that they looked up,
as well as to check words across several dictionaries to see them used in
various contexts. This audio component was indeed an important
aspect which contributed to mobile devices being considered as having
wider potential as a tool in language teaching and learning. Another
important function of electronic dictionaries was to make it possible for
learners to handwrite words that they were looking up, adding a more
kinetic element to the learning process as well.
The emergence of the smartphone and tablets with touchscreens in
the late 2000s meant that functions that were once distributed across
several devices came to appear together in a single device. Smartphones
and tablets became equipped with high-quality MP3 players, diction-
aries became available as apps, and other functions as described in the
previous section were also added, such as cameras and other interactive
capabilities. This led to an explosion of developments over the past
decade with the hard-fought competition between various developers
of mobile devices such as Apple, Google, Huawei, Oppo, Samsung and
Xiaomi. In some ways the users have been the ultimate winners in some
ways of this competition in that processing power, battery life,
memory, storage, operating systems, camera quality and screen size
have improved exponentially over the past several years as developers
strive to outdo one another to attract customers to purchase their
products. Ignoring the other advances from GSM phones (which were
also surprisingly sophisticated devices), the first iPhone had a 3.500
screen with a 2.0 MP camera, 620 MHz processor, 128 MB of RAM
and up to 16 GB storage when it was released in 2007. The latest
version of the iPhone at the time of writing has a 5.500 screen (far from
the largest available) with a 12 MP camera, 2.49 GHz dual core
processor, 4 GB of RAM and up to 512 GB of storage. There are, of
course, far more powerful devices available on the market at present,
but the continuity of the iPhone from the earliest models makes com-
parisons of the developments immediately obvious. Although there is
vast variation in the sophistication of mobile devices owned around the
world, now more than three-quarters of the population own a mobile
device with internet access (GSMA Intelligence, 2019). The impact on
teaching and learning is that the vast majority of learners will already
own their own devices at the time of commencing study, be it formal or
informal, and their mobile devices are likely to already feature in some
way in the learners’ mind in their toolbox of learning resources.
22 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
It is not surprising that the path followed by MALL as a field has
had some similarities to that of CALL over this period, but at the same
time, there have been variations that have appeared as a result of the
differences in ownership of technologies and the functionality of
the devices themselves. Furthermore, the foundation that has already
been set in place by the twenty-odd years of CALL research has also
played a role in shaping MALL research and practice, and at least
some of the lessons learned from CALL have been applied to MALL.
In saying this, there has definitely been some degree of “wheel
reinventing” taking place as well, and it is important to reflect on
how both MALL and CALL have come to be where they are today in
order to consider how to seek out the best teaching and learning
practices with mobile technologies.
2.2 Using the Terms CALL and MALL
As touched upon in Chapter 1, CALL and MALL are in some ways
misunderstood, and the terminology itself can be a cause of confusion.
Both the terms CALL and MALL are often used in a somewhat
nebulous manner. They may sometimes be used to refer to a specific
technology (a computer, a mobile device, etc.), sometimes a
teaching approach (i.e., teaching with a computer or mobile device),
and sometimes both. “CALL” was used in a sense that CALL was
somehow homogenous, and there appeared to be some shared under-
standing of what “CALL” was. Discussions between teachers would
frequently include, “Do you use CALL?” and this was largely under-
stood to mean some kind of courseware or other commercial package
for use in the classroom. This is, of course, very much a misnomer, in
that CALL refers to using technologies to achieve different learning
goals in different ways, as can be seen by the enormous amount of
work carried out over the years, of which courseware is a relatively
minor technology, with research using various generic technologies
appearing most frequently (see Stockwell, 2012). In the same way,
MALL has also been used in a somewhat confusing manner. The word
“mobile” in MALL is sometimes used to refer to the types of device
used (i.e., mobile devices) and sometimes used to describe the nature of
the learning as being something that happens while the user is in
transit between locations (i.e., learning on the move).
The frequently tacit view of the meaning of “computer” in CALL or
“mobile” in MALL can have a strong impact on the way in which these
interrelated fields are viewed, and the naming of them can lead to
assumptions that may not necessarily accurately reflect what the fields
represent. For example, there has been continued argument for many
2.2 Using the Terms CALL and MALL 23
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
years about whether the use of the term CALL is appropriate to repre-
sent the broad range of technologies that are being seen in teaching and
learning environments, and there have been multiple alternatives pro-
posed over the years, most notably TELL (technology-enhanced lan-
guage learning) and TALL (technology-assisted language learning).
While the arguments in favour of using these alternatives are under-
standable to a certain extent, the question of the actual necessity to do
so still remains. There have been a number of discussions that have
supported the continued use of the term CALL (Hubbard & Levy,
2016; Levy & Hubbard, 2005; Stockwell, 2012b), with one of the
primary reasons being the fact that the term has been in widespread
use for at least three decades now, and it continues to be used as the title
of various books and journals. CALL has included more than just
desktop and laptop computers for many years now, and it is not in
any way different from or inferior to some emerging field with a
different name like “TELL” that looks at the broader range of tech-
nologies. The research that has appeared in books and journals using
the term “CALL” has been extremely broad and is not limited to a
single type of technology. Over the years, it has been used to refer to
mainframe computers, personal computers, laptop computers, laser
discs, e-book readers, PDAs, tablets, mobile phones, MP3 players and
electronic dictionaries, among others.
Depending on the view of what a “computer” is, the term CALL is
most certainly sufficient to encompass all types of technologies that
would be considered as being relevant to discussions on their use in
second-language teaching and learning. Definitions of what a com-
puter actually is may vary, but in its simplest form, a computer must
allow for some means of input, have a processor to perform the
required operations with this input and then provide the result as
output. The ways in which this input can take place will differ
depending on the device, and input methods have undergone an
enormous number of changes over the decades since the general public
has had access to personal computers. Input for these early computers
consisted largely of just a keyboard and some kind of storage device
such as cassette tapes, 5 ¼00 floppy disks and small hard drives (if we
take it for granted that ticker tape machines were not exactly the
mainstream for personal use), but over time, storage capabilities
increased dramatically with more durable floppy disks and hard
drives, CD-ROMs, laser discs, DVDs and even voice input appeared.
More recently, USB flash memory sticks; input methods such as mice,
trackpads, styluses and touchscreens; and alternative ways of linking
machines to other sources and devices such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and
NFC (Near Field Communication), to name a few, have been added to
24 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the repertoire of potential forms of input (but some of these have been
superseded and fallen out of usage completely).
As described at the beginning of this chapter, processors have also
undergone enormous evolution over the years, and without going into
specifics, not only are they much faster but they are also more capable
of handling multiple tasks at the same time (although this remains a
feature that does separate computer processors and mobile phone/
tablet processors to a certain degree, where mobile processors are far
less suited to running applications concurrently). Processed informa-
tion can, for example, be made available to a screen, a speaker, a
printer, as a file on internal or external storage or to the Internet or
a different device or devices. If we use this definition of a computer as a
device that has a means of receiving input, processing that input and
then providing some kind of input based on the processed informa-
tion, it is clear that many other devices – including electronic diction-
aries, MP3 players, mobile phones and tablets – would share the vast
majority of these features, with the primary difference simply being
their portability, sometimes with limitations in their range of func-
tions. If we look back at the ENIAC and other room-sized computers
from the 1940s, we can see – physically at the very least – a closer
relationship between smartphones and, say, laptop computers than we
would see between computers from the 1940s and personal computers
today, despite the same name being used. Thus, despite the fact that
our modern mobile phones are indeed a computer of sorts, the way in
which they were developed from initially being a portable replacement
for fixed-point telephones means that they have come to be viewed as
entirely different devices from computers. This is perhaps one of the
biggest hurdles that practitioners with technology need to contend
with, and it is also a view that extends to how mobile devices are
perceived as being used by others, where assumptions can be made
that learners are “playing” with their devices rather than using them
for a study tool (see Chapter 6). Even though the term “computer”
would seem to be quite applicable to the range of devices that would
seem to be fit into the broader category of “technology,” overcoming
the psychological barriers pertaining to what they are and how they
are perceived as being used has the potential to contribute to this
pluralistic view.
The term “mobile phone” (or “cell phone,” depending on geo-
graphical preferences) has for many years referred to devices that go
far beyond the functionality of their namesake, the landline telephone.
Even in the early 1990s, these devices allowed for sending of text
messages, something that was not even thinkable for conventional
fixed telephones (if we exclude sending faxes). The smartphones that
2.2 Using the Terms CALL and MALL 25
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
are the mainstream today obviously go even further beyond the
description of a telephone, and research has shown that audio tele-
phoning is now one of the lesser-used functions of these devices
(Richmond, 2012). The operating systems and associated software of
these devices are extremely sophisticated, allowing users to have access
to various textual and audiovisual communication and social
networking tools, games, internet browsers, calendars and office tools,
most of which were very much in the domain of computers little more
than a decade ago (cf. Kress & Pachler, 2007). Mobile devices have
contributed to pushing the envelope further, as it were, with regards to
touch technologies and wireless data transfer, and many of these
features have been reverse-engineered into laptop and even desktop
computers (although sales of the latter have dropped considerably in
favour of the former, or hybrid devices that sit somewhere between a
“laptop computer” and a “tablet”). While technically there remain
differences between most mobile devices and computers in terms of
processors, operating systems and other software, for the most part,
the user experience makes it difficult to identify noticeable differences
in performance between these different types of devices. It is in the
portability, input methods and screen size, however, that we have
the most salient differences, and this is largely the reason behind the
differences in perceptions that many people hold, despite the fact that
the similarities far outweigh the differences. In this way, the terms
CALL and MALL have led to stereotyped views of what the fields are
about – both for practitioners in the field and for people outside the
field – that can lead to preconceptions about what technologies are
used and the ways in which they are applied to language teaching and
learning.
Another similarity that both CALL and MALL are subject to is
comparison with other teaching methods. As described previously,
the difficulties in relating either to any particular type of technology
or approach make such a question quite meaningless. Since its early
days, the question of effectiveness of CALL was frequently in the
background behind decisions about whether institutions should be
spending money on computer laboratories or other equipment. The
problem is, however, that asking whether CALL is better than other
methods is akin to asking if using textbooks is more effective than non-
use of textbooks or if using a whiteboard is better than not using one.
The variety of uses of technology make such comparisons questionable
at the least, and possibly even counterproductive. We see a similar
phenomenon these days with mobile technologies as well, where studies
seek to ask questions about attitudes towards MALL and to determine
whether or not MALL is effective compared to other methods,
26 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
including CALL or non-use of technology. Effectiveness of and atti-
tudes towards any method – be it CALL, MALL, or otherwise – will
depend on a great deal of factors that go beyond the technology itself.
Both CALL and MALL use sophisticated electronic devices in order
to facilitate the teaching and learning of languages, but we must be
aware of the physical, functional, social and perceived differences
between computers and mobile devices to see how they have been –
and subsequently could be – used effectively by learners to enhance
their acquisition of their chosen target language. The different operat-
ing systems and software of various mobile and non-mobile devices
may have slightly different functionalities, and this is also the case for
many programs and applications that are used for language teaching
and learning. Part of this is as a result of the physical and technological
affordances of the device, which would certainly be thought to have an
impact on what can and should be done through mobile devices.
Needless to say, these affordances have also had an impact on the
focus of research and the ways in which this research is carried out, as
discussed in the following sections.
2.3 Emerging Affordances of Mobile Devices
The concept of “affordances” was originally coined by Gibson (1979,
2015), who used it to describe the perceived potential uses that an
artefact (i.e., objects, devices or any natural or human-made things
around us) may be used for. These may vary from the actual intended
functions themselves, meaning that there will necessarily be individual
differences that will impact the ways in which objects – or artefacts –
will be used and viewed. Van Osch and Mendelson (2011) proposed
three types of affordances: designed affordances, improvised affor-
dances and emergent affordances. Designed affordances are those that
have been built into the artefact by the developers and are created in
such a way as to support the use of the artefact in a way that is
expected by them. For example, a colouring book is designed for
children to fill in colours of pictures that have been provided by the
authors. The pictures in themselves are basically already complete, and
the only thing that is required is to choose what colours the child
wishes to use and to draw or paint them into the existing pictures.
Improvised affordances are those that were not recognised or intended
by the developers, but that users themselves find while using the
artefact. Using the colouring book example, improvised affordances
might be that children try to draw new pictures based on those that are
in the picture book or add other things to the existing pictures such as
people, furniture or a background. These may not have been intended
2.3 Emerging Affordances of Mobile Devices 27
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
uses of the colouring book, but users improvise and add their own
affordances over time. Emergent affordances are changes to the envir-
onment itself as a result of the artefact that were not consciously
anticipated by the developers or the users. For instance, seeing
their children enjoying a colouring book may prompt parents to
create groups for them to play together with other children using
their colouring books, thereby creating a sense of excitement and
community that was not anticipated by the developers or the users
themselves. This example suggests that affordances are a complex
product of subsystems which include the characteristics of the artefacts
and users (Maier & Fadel, 2009), and the broad spectrum of affor-
dances that are ultimately attached to an artefact will often be far
removed from the initial expectations of the developers, emerging over
time through its use usually with repercussions that go beyond the
actual artefact.
The term affordance has come into broad use in research associated
with technology as well, with technical affordances describing the
functions of a device and may encompass the designed affordances
(but also include features such as the size and weight of the device).
A modern smartphone, for example, was designed by developers for
telephoning, using the Internet, taking pictures, GPS and so forth.
Over years of use, improvised affordances have appeared as a result
of users exploring the technical affordances in practice. The relation-
ship between an artefact and the social context is known as
sociomateriality (Leonardi, 2012; Orlikowski, 2007). As Suchman
(2007) explains, it is essentially impossible to separate the social and
the material in practice, and artefacts will be shaped by users in the
same way that users will be shaped by artefacts. Individuals will
interact with artefacts in different ways as a result of their individual
characteristics and objectives, and these differences will ultimately
impact upon the artefacts, the users and the larger environment (the
issue of sociomateriality will be dealt with in more detail in Chapter 9).
Thus, the affordances of different devices will depend not only in their
functions (i.e., technical affordances) but also on the backgrounds,
skills, experience and imaginations of the users adopting them in their
individual environments.
The technical affordances of mobile technologies have undergone
an enormous change over time since the late 2000s, in terms of greatly
enhanced processing power, storage, operating systems and technical
functionality. These changes have resulted in research that has
focussed specifically on these emerging affordances and how they
might be adopted or adapted to teaching and learning. From the
beginning of MALL, research looking at how technical affordances
28 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
of new devices (including hardware and software) could be used for
language learning has had a central position. For example, the SMS
function of mobile phones was an early area of research, which was
used for creation of mobile flash cards (Thornton & Houser, 2002)
and for the sending and receiving of SMS messages, such as receiving
information from the teacher (Kennedy & Levy, 2008), and for enab-
ling learners to send necessary details to one another to complete
information-gap activities (Kiernan & Aizawa, 2004). Web browsers
made it possible to access the Internet for accessing learning tasks and
activities (e.g., Stockwell, 2007) or conduct searches for information
(Liaw, Hatala & Huang, 2010).
Other developments in mobile technologies have also been reflected
in research pertaining to their usage. The camera function was one
that attracted the attention of researchers, both in the form of still
images and video recordings. Liu and Chen (2015), for example, had
learners take photographs of scenes that reflected grammatical forms
that they learned in class, and Gromik (2012) showed when learners
uploaded videos of themselves speaking in English, it gave them
confidence in speaking. Other features that have been used include
QR (quick response) codes that enabled information in the real world
to be quickly transferred to PDAs as they used a map to visit learning
zones (Liu, Tan & Chu, 2010), or to provide information supplemen-
tary to pictures in materials to make them more interactive (Rivers,
2009). These interactive tools make it possible to link learning
resources together with the real world and, hence, can give learners
greater sense of reality with regards to their language learning.
Another feature that has been considered as having potential is the
GPS function, where the location of the learner can be used as a means
of triggering information. An example of this was used by Sandberg,
Maris and de Geus (2011), who provided Dutch learners of English
with phones with GPS capabilities. The learners then walked around a
zoo, where they could retrieve information about the animals that they
saw based on their location through the phones. Both of these studies
are linked with the concept of augmented reality, which is when the
real world is supplemented by digital resources. This can take the form
of having a picture on a page in a book become a video file when a
mobile device is held over it (Boonbrahm, Kaewrat & Boonbrahm,
2015), adding audio or annotations to items or places that learners
might encounter in the real world using image matching (Liu & Tsai,
2013), or GPS that enables the device to obtain information either
from the Internet or other nearby devices.
The emergence of apps through the various stores (App Store,
Google Play, etc.) has made it possible for learners to have access to
2.3 Emerging Affordances of Mobile Devices 29
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
an extremely large number of apps available either for free or com-
mercially (or, in some cases, a free version which can be upgraded to a
full version at cost). This broad range of apps has been empowering
for learners, but at the same time, it also puts a burden on learners to
try to make decisions about what apps are the most appropriate for
them. While some have argued that choosing from the variety of apps
that is available may be liberating to students (Mindog, 2016), for the
most part, it is not surprising that many learners find appropriate app
selection an extremely difficult task to achieve (Kim, 2013), and as
such, they need guidance to choose which apps to use (see Chapter 3)
and training in how to use them to benefit from them as much as
possible (learner training is covered in more depth in Chapter 7).
Whereas the literature into CALL has featured examples of develop-
ment of dedicated software for language learning, MALL research has
included the development of dedicated apps. In both cases, these apps
are typically suited to a specific learning environment or context and,
to that end, have also some limitations in their broader application,
but these examples do provide insights into what is desirable design
in apps. The affordances of mobile devices have remained a topic
of investigation and, as Kukulska-Hulme and Viberg (2018) have
proposed, include flexibility and continuity of use, socialisation, per-
sonalisation, active participation and self-evaluation, and links with
real-world situations and culture. Knowledge of the affordances of
mobile devices is certainly essential, but it is important to go beyond
this and to see how this knowledge can be applied to using them in a
pedagogically sound manner.
One problem that became apparent with the mobile devices owned
by the learners themselves (BYOD = bring your own device) was that
learners were bringing in tools not only running different operating
systems on their smartphones (iOS, Android and, later, Windows
Mobile) but also the hardware itself varied from learner to learner,
with some owning the later models of mobile devices at one end of the
scale and students using the most basic models at the other. This fact
has implications for the choice of technologies by teachers to ensure
that no learners are disadvantaged when compared with their peers
because of financial reasons (see Chapter 1 for a discussion of the
digital divide).
While the boundaries between modern mobile devices and more
traditional technologies such as desktop and laptop computers are
starting to become blurred, there are features and functions that are
typically associated with devices such as mobile phones and, to a lesser
degree, tablets. These include physical mobile interaction (PMI) using
QR codes (Rivers, 2009), Global Positioning System (GPS) capabilities
30 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
(Cheng, Hwang, Wu, Shadiev & Xie, 2010), push notifications
(Stockwell, 2013), and various communication tools that enable the
user to have greater interaction with the surroundings, peers, inter-
locutors, and teachers (e.g., Mok, 2012; Tran, 2016). As alluded to
earlier in this chapter, there are also often differences between the
desktop and mobile versions of software and apps (and, indeed,
sometimes between apps on different operating systems such as iOS
or Android). At the same time, even the range of mobile devices
carried by learners is decreasing, and where once learners might have
carried MP3 players or e-readers in addition to their tablets or smart-
phones, these functions are being consolidated into the devices that
learners already possess (Delcker, Honal & Ifenthaler, 2018).
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research
CALL research as we know it today extends across four decades, and
there has been an enormous amount achieved over this period in terms
of the quantity and quality of research which has been carried out. It is
not surprising that much of what has appeared in CALL literature
over the years has largely reflected developments of technologies
described in the previous section. Research from the 1970s and
1980s focussed on standalone “microcomputers,” which were con-
sidered as being extremely small for the time and resembled many
modern-day desktop PCs. Language learning tools included software
that focussed mainly on grammar or vocabulary (Anderson, 1987),
local networks where learners could interact with one another using
text chat (Young, 1988), videodiscs which could allow for a limited
degree of interactive multimedia (Peppard, 1989), and hyperlinks,
where reading could diverge from the traditional linear model and
allow learners freedom to move through a text or resources or access
annotations with relatively little interruption (Tchudi, 1988). While
there was a simplicity in the research from this era in some respects,
the depth of thinking that went into the development and implemen-
tation of CALL materials should not be ignored.
It is easy to assume that CALL from this time was primitive, and
although it may have been limited by the technologies to some extent,
it is clearly evident that the view and expectations (both positive and
negative) of using technology in language teaching and learning con-
cepts were insightful and have done much to inform practice of today.
Themes that appeared during this time have reoccurred in later
decades once the technology caught up with the imagination and
creativity of researchers from this era. For example, intelligent syntax
checkers (Galletly, Butcher & Lim How, 1989; Paramskas, 1986),
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research 31
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
natural language parsers (Imlah & du Boulay, 1985), intelligent
tutoring systems (see Chapelle, 1989), and computer-mediated com-
munication such as computer-based messaging, mailing, and discus-
sion forums (Murray, 1988) have continued to be the focus of CALL
research some twenty to thirty years after they first appeared in the
literature. Though, of course, advances in technology have meant that
there is a greater degree of sophistication in the software and applica-
tions that are used, we can see that there was a lot of early work that
provided a very solid foundation for later development.
One area where we have seen significant development, however, is
in the type of research that is carried out using technology. Early
CALL research consisted predominantly of comparative research to
determine the effectiveness of CALL compared with non-CALL means
(see Burston, 2003), often as a means of proving that the time, effort,
and expense that went into the development and implementation of
CALL resources was worthwhile. Failure to prove that technology was
somehow more “effective” than more traditional means was to admit
that the benefits of introducing technology did not exceed (or even
reach) the personnel and financial costs associated with it. As a result
of this, there was a tendency to see research that showed “unreason-
able effectiveness” (Felix, 2005), in that when considering the methods
in which a technology was used, the reported outcomes were highly
unlikely to be possible and, indeed, failed to be replicated in later
studies. The CALL literature of the 1980s and 1990s contained quite
a significant number of studies that compared use and non-use of
technology, but considering that the technology was often an addition
to the existing method used, it was not surprising to see more favour-
able results when technology was introduced into the equation.
A further problem that Hubbard (2005) pointed out was much of
the pre-2000 research was typically carried out with a small number of
subjects for a short period of time, and often termed “pilot studies.”
There were rarely any follow-up studies performed to confirm the
validity of results that may well have been – at least in part – a result
of the novelty of using newer or more “exciting” tools rather than
as an outcome of innovative pedagogies which capitalised on the
technology. Indeed, despite the arguments in favour of CALL – that
it was motivating for learners in terms of its individualised nature,
opportunities for learner control, and “rapid, frequent, and non-
judgemental feedback” (Warschauer, 1995, p. 30) – research has
consistently demonstrated that while there may be motivational effects
for learners in the short term, learner engagement is not maintained
after this initial novelty effect has worn off (see Stockwell, 2013, for a
discussion), suggesting that it is the pedagogy adopted for using the
32 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
technology rather than the technology itself which is likely to contrib-
ute to longer-term task engagement (task engagement is discussed in
more depth in Chapter 7).
In fact, later studies that were carried out over longer periods of
time which controlled for the novelty effect in the early stages have
more often than not tended to show “no significant difference,” but it
could also be argued that the pendulum of proving the effectiveness of
technology had swung a little too far back the other way, where
researchers became overly cautious of making any claims in favour
of the technology. While studies may not show any immediate favour-
able results of technology, it does not necessarily mean that there have
not been other impacts that might manifest themselves quite some time
after the data have been collected and analysed, so to dismiss the role
that technology plays on the basis of a single study over a limited
period of time is just as problematic as holding an overly positive view.
Comparisons of CALL and non-CALL are, in many ways, comparing
“apples with oranges,” where, despite some areas where comparisons
might be possible, there are too many differing features that render
direct comparisons somewhat uninformative.
Though we have seen that there were many extremely inventive and
innovating uses of technology, some of the early literature into tech-
nology use in language teaching and learning contexts showed a lack
of creativity or attempt to take advantages of the features of the
technology, and many CALL activities were essentially digital equiva-
lents of paper-based versions. Of these, many allowed for automatic
grading but often included relatively superficial interaction or feed-
back in the shape of hollow compliments such as “Well done!” for
correct answers and encouragement like “Good try” when learners
failed to produce the expected responses to activities. This type of
research was more concerned with what could logistically be achieved
through the technology and did not take into account the body of non-
CALL literature that was already making headway in showing when,
what, and how feedback could benefit learners (e.g., Sheppard, 1992;
Truscott, 1996). In saying this, feedback did feature in the CALL
literature as well, with research that explored automatically generated
feedback in intelligent grammar checkers (van der Linden, 1993) and
human feedback from the teacher through communication tools such
as email (Hoffman, 1994). Studies of this type paved the way for later
research that considered the complexities of the relationship of task,
feedback, and learner responses to feedback.
There is no doubt that the emergence of the Internet in the early
1990s had an impact on the face of what CALL meant. Prior to this,
CALL predominantly consisted of standalone machines running
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research 33
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
software or CD-ROMs (Cummins, 1998) or machines that were net-
worked locally to allow for some degree of interaction amongst users
through dedicated software (Beauvois, 1995). While these tools came
to allow for multimedia as the technology developed, it was not until
the emergence of the Internet that learners were able to interact more
freely with other learners outside of their own classes; classes of target-
language speakers for language exchange; or other groups such as chat
groups or even newsgroups, bulletin board systems, or discussion sites
intended for native speakers to exchange opinions on their areas of
interest. In fact, the Internet (or World Wide Web) was the impetus for
a boom in research in computer-mediated communication, initially
text based (Toyoda & Harrison, 2002) but then moving on to audio
based (Cziko & Park, 2003) and then video based (Wang, 2004). The
promise of interacting with native-speaking interlocutors was indeed
an attractive one, again with undertones of increased motivation and
intercultural understanding along with opportunities for negotiation
of input (Kitade, 2006), but the problem of task design along with
unfounded assumptions regarding the nature of online communica-
tion resulted in outcomes that were not always as positive as might
have been hoped for.
Studies looking at mobile device usage was, however, relatively
limited, as student ownership remained limited to a certain extent
and relied on the teacher providing class sets. This meant that all of
the students were using the same technology, and there was essentially
no variation in the tools that were being used by the subjects of studies
utilising them. As described before, however, the downside was that
the tools were closely monitored (likely to avoid anything being
broken or going missing), and usage outside of the classroom was
typically still on the school grounds (e.g., Chen & Li, 2010). Smaller
phones began to appear with simple web browsers that enabled users
to access information over a 2G network, but the volume of data that
could be received was limited, as was the complexity of the sites that
could be loaded by the relatively simple browsers of the time. This did
allow some creative studies to be carried out, using both the SMS (and/
or email) functions and the browsers. The technical affordance of
being able to use text and to be able to access the Internet proved to
be the start of a movement towards using more text-based communi-
cation on mobile devices, and the original primary function of tele-
phoning gradually became a lesser-used function.
Post-2000 research saw a range of new concepts emerge – including
various learning management systems (LMSs), educational gaming,
MOOCs, and, of course, sophisticated mobile devices. This research
was shaped by new technologies of the time, but there was also a shift
34 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
in the focus of the research, prompted in part by the critical evalu-
ations of CALL research by Hubbard (2005) and Felix (2005). Thus,
the focus came to include the specific features of CALL design and
of learner engagement (Stockwell, 2012a), such as the role of learner
training (Romeo & Hubbard, 2010), the development of learner
autonomy (Hafner & Miller, 2011), sustainability of task engagement
inside and outside of classroom settings (Appel & Mullen, 2002), and
the views of students towards using their own personal devices for
language learning purposes (Stockwell, 2008). This resulted in a
movement away from comparing CALL to non-CALL in terms of
effectiveness for second-language teaching and learning towards
looking at the specific features of the environment, pedagogies,
training, and support that could play a role in facilitating more effect-
ive and efficient learning.
The evolution of CALL from its beginnings as largely a replication
of paper-based materials until it reached a “critical mass” whereby the
finer details of design and the practice of using technologies in varied
contexts were investigated has been repeated in the evolution of
MALL in some respects. Early MALL research that appeared in the
mid-2000s was, in essence, a replication of the resources available for
computers adapted to mobile devices, often in a way that was simpli-
fied to work with lower processing power and smaller screens,
resulting in “stripped down versions of their more complex desktop
predecessors” (Squire, 2009, p. 71). While this was hardly surprising
in some sense, it is likely to have contributed – at least in part – to the
limited engagement and the failure to meet expectations regarding
learning through mobile devices, a fact that was pointed out by several
researchers investigating mobile learning during this period (e.g.,
Petersen, Divitini & Chabert, 2008; Stockwell, 2008). Of course, there
are other reasons why engagement in mobile-based activities was
limited, particularly where learners were using their own devices for
engaging in activities. Data costs were relatively high, and when the
onus for paying this was placed on the learners, there was reluctance
and even resistance to using it. Obviously, Wi-Fi for mobile devices at
this point was limited, meaning that self-funded data usage was essen-
tially the only option open to learners, and this combination of factors
may well have contributed to limited engagement when other alterna-
tives were available. Studies that were undertaken with learners using
devices that were provided to them yielded somewhat higher usage
rates. When PDAs were provided to learners, for example, studies
have shown learners to be more willing to undertake activities on
these mobile devices (see Stockwell, 2014, for a discussion), but these
were typically lent to learners for limited periods of time, and there
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research 35
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
was likely a novelty effect at work that may have contributed to
improved usage. Furthermore, the conditions surrounding the use of
these devices was quite controlled, and as such, it was very difficult to
get any reliable indication of if or how learners engaged in mobile
learning in natural contexts outside of the classroom.
It is not surprising that MALL research has also been heavily
impacted by developments and availability of technologies in much
the same way as CALL has been. Because smartphones are largely
owned by the learners themselves and carried with them throughout
the day, they have enabled researchers to gain insights into the true
nature of “mobile” learning, in terms of the ways in which learners
integrate learning through mobile devices into their everyday lifestyles.
This is something that was not really possible when devices were
borrowed or when the physical limitations of the devices made it
difficult to design a wide variety of activities. There were, however,
attempts to overcome these difficulties based on the functions of the
devices at the time with minimal outlay required by the learners.
Kennedy and Levy (2008), for example, capitalised on the SMS func-
tion of mobile phones to provide learners with learning-focussed
reminders of vocabulary and expressions that had been taught in class,
or upcoming programs on TV that learners could watch to support
their language learning. Flash cards (Thornton & Houser, 2002) and
an intelligent vocabulary tutor (Stockwell, 2007) were also examples
of tools designed for the precursors to smartphones available during
the 2000s, and these tools could be operated at relatively low cost.
There were, of course, other devices that were the subject of research
during the early 2000s, such as iPods being provided to all first-year
students at a US university and MP3 players being used to distribute
college entrance exam lectures (see Chinnery, 2006, for a discussion).
Studies that looked at the use of MP3 players for podcasting appeared
in the literature for some time, and the possibilities were considered as
being hopeful (e.g., Rosell-Aguilar, 2007). As with mobile phones,
however, usage proved to be somewhat less than expected, with
reasons being cited that it was easier to use a computer, and that
learners did not know how to transfer podcasts to their MP3 players
(Abdous, Camarena & Facer, 2009). This second factor highlights
another major factor associated with mobile learning: the provision
of sufficient training, which will be covered in Chapter 7.
MALL research over the past several years has certainly become far
more diverse in the contexts in which mobile devices are being used,
the range of uses, and, of course, the skills and areas that are targeted
as a part of the mobile-based tasks. Vocabulary has featured over-
whelmingly as the main area to be studied by researchers since its
36 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
inception, and this was particularly the case with the earlier devices
described previously. Smartphones have meant that a far wider range
of language skills and areas have started to be researched as well, with
studies appearing that look at listening and speaking (Liu, 2009),
reading (Hsu, Hwang & Chang, 2013), grammar (Wang & Smith,
2013), vocabulary (Lu, 2008), and even writing (Liu & Tsai, 2013).
There remains, however, an imbalance towards vocabulary acquisi-
tion, but this is likely caused in part by the fact that it is easier to
measure in research than other skills and, as such, may not necessarily
be completely attributable to the technology itself.
It is in some sense inevitable that MALL follows a similar path of
predominantly emulating both paper-based and CALL activities, but
research that considers the technological functions of mobile technolo-
gies has started to take a more central role in recent years. Modern
mobile devices, particularly smartphones, have an enormous range of
functionalities – including powerful processors, high-definition
touchscreens, high-resolution cameras, video and audio recording
capabilities, GPS capabilities, and various wireless interactive inter-
faces such as Bluetooth and NFC, as well as physical data transfer
through linking with cables, USB flash memory sticks, or SD cards.
The fact that learners possess smartphones that already have these
functions built in without needing to purchase other devices has
contributed to a shift towards mobile learning, and as such, practi-
tioners consider the specific functions or affordances of mobile devices
and how they may be applied to MALL pedagogies.
From the Field: Comparing Technologies
In both my capacity as a teacher of graduate students in applied linguistics
and as an editor of journals using technology for language teaching and
learning, I often see the starting point of research as the comparison of new
technologies with non-use of technology or, more frequently since MALL has
become more widespread, comparisons of mobile technologies with other
technologies. This is not something that is beyond understanding. Newer
technologies do seem to invoke questions about their effectiveness, and at a
first glance, comparing with what has previously been shown to be effective
in some sense seems very reasonable. However, the problem is that accur-
ate comparisons just aren’t possible in the vast majority of cases. By default,
using different tools will alter the learning environment, and artificially
attempting to control for all variables will usually end up with comparisons
that have little meaning. The advice I usually give to my graduate students is
2.4 Evolution of CALL and MALL Research 37
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that they should ask themselves why they feel a need to show one technol-
ogy is more effective than another. More important research would be to
examine how a technology – including mobile technologies – do indeed alter
the environment, and to use that as a starting point for seeking out pedago-
gies that may lead to more successful language learning.
2.5 From Affordance-Based to Pedagogy-Based Practice
As alluded to before, a look at the research into both CALL and
MALL have revealed similar patterns of evolution, starting with the
emergence of a new technology, often immediately followed by a rush
or publications about this new technology. This pattern has been seen
a number of times as new technologies emerge – some of which have
persisted (LMSs, gaming, MOOCs, etc.), and others which have all
but disappeared from the research, either because they failed to reach
wide adoption (e.g., laserdiscs) or because they were superseded by
newer technologies that made the older ones no longer viable to use,
despite reaching relatively high levels of attention (Hypercard, Hot
Potatoes, etc.).
The lifespan of a technology can be mapped onto Gartner’s hype
cycles (e.g., Gartner, 2016) – which can give an interesting perspective
into how technologies can be introduced, used (or forgotten), and
linked to pedagogy. While Gartner’s hype cycles have received some
criticism for their lack of explanation of the phenomena they represent
(Cuban & Jandrić, 2015), they do provide some insights into how
technologies may be viewed by users and how they might be used (or
not used). There are four main phases in Gartner’s hype cycles,
starting with the technology trigger, when the technology appears
for the first time, up to the “peak of inflated expectations,” where
users of the technology may expect that more might be possible from
the technology than is actually logistically feasible. This is behind
Bax’s (2003) argument that one of the fallacies of using technology
is that a new technology is often considered as being more effective
than what came before it, simply because it is newer. This can prompt
users of the technology to believe that it will be able to solve the
problems that were evident in previous methods of technologies and
cause a rush to use it with expectations that may not be practical (see
Stockwell & Reinders, 2019, for a discussion). It is hardly surprising
that such inflated expectations lead one to disillusionment, which is
the next step in the hype cycle. It is at this point that the disappoint-
ment regarding a technology may result in a greatly reduced use of the
38 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
technology, perhaps even to the extent that it is abandoned. Should
usage of the technology continue, then comes what Gartner refers as
the “slope of enlightenment,” where the way in which a given tech-
nology might be used is investigated in more detail, until eventually
reaching the “plateau of productivity,” where the balance of how to
use a technology together with existing tools can be settled on, and
specific ways of integrating the tool to achieve maximum productivity
become clear to the users.
Although Gartner’s hype cycles were not intended for education, it
is easy to see how they can be applied. We can see, for example, how
the early phases (from technology trigger to the trough of disillusion-
ment) typically represent affordance-based practice, where users are
still trying to identify the technical affordances of the technology and
counterbalance them with their own individual goals and expectations
for the technology’s use in their individual context. It is very much a
trial-and-error phase, where practitioners consider various ways in
which the technology might be used. This phase also coincides with
what Levy and Stockwell (2006) refer to as “emergent CALL,” where
new technologies are still very much in the experimental stage, and the
potential of the technology is sought.
The later phases of the hype cycles (the slope of enlightenment and
the plateau of productivity) reflect a narrowing of focus to pedagogy-
based practice. There is already some understanding of the technol-
ogy and the way in which it might be used, and, as such, researchers
can direct their attention to finding the best practice for the technol-
ogy, where they hope to achieve as much as possible from the
technology, using a balanced pedagogy that builds upon what has
been found out about the technology from the previous experimental
phase. This phase corresponds to Levy and Stockwell’s (2006)
“established CALL,” where practitioners already have a basic under-
standing of the technical affordances of a technology and now look
at how more generalisable conclusions about using the technology
effectively are devised.
This means that technologies in language education appear to
follow a pattern that starts from the hype of what the technology is
capable of, with the exploration of the technical affordances of the
device and what the potential uses of the technology might be.
Expectations appear to be high at this point, often to the point of
being unrealistic. The release of the iPad, for example, was thought by
many to be a revolution in education, where textbooks would become
obsolete and learning would take on new forms of interactivity that
were simply not possible through more traditional means. While there
has obviously been some impact on education from devices such as
2.5 Affordance-Based to Pedagogy-Based Practice 39
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
iPads, the concept of providing all learners with them at the beginning
of a course of study has not really eventuated. After seeing that iPads
themselves did not radically change the learning environment in any
broad sense, some abandoned them altogether as a learning tool. At
the same time, others have considered what features of iPads could
lead to more informed pedagogy. Without understating the import-
ance of the earlier phase of exploration with new devices, it is in these
next stages where the empirical testing of these devices has led to
pedagogies that lead to more stable results. Research into mobile
devices, like those that have come before, needs to go beyond the
potential and extend into the actual in order for meaningful progress
to be made in the practice of using them.
From the Field: Hype Cycles with Technology in Language
Learning Research
Technology in language teaching and learning has invariably been bound to
trends. Some of these trends last for as long as several years, and others
seem to be very short-lived, I recall attending many conferences over the
years where there seemed to be a certain technology or concept that
attracted a particularly large number of submissions, regardless of the
theme of the conference itself. I can still very clearly remember one confer-
ence where there were numerous presentations about the LMS Moodle. The
conference theme was fairly broad (Human Issues in CALL), so it was not so
unexpected to see presentations that were relatively loosely related to the
theme, but in that particular year, there was as many as one-third of the
presentations or more just exploring the affordances of Moodle. Moodle has,
of course, remained broadly used, but presentations that look at what
Moodle can do have all but disappeared. In this sense, while Moodle has
moved from the affordances stage through to the pedagogy stage on the
hype cycles chart, research has become quite sparse. Actual use of tools will
not always be accurately reflected in the research which appears about
them, where research seems to rotate around new developments. It is often
not the case of these tools disappearing but, rather, the way in which
research is framed to focus more on trends than might be the case
in practice.
2.6 Complexity of Research, Theory and Practice in MALL
The intersection between research, practice, and theory has been
considered a central feature of most academic fields, and CALL and
MALL are by no means any exception to this. There have been several
40 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
articles and books published over the past several decades that deal
with one, two, or even all three of these areas, and as such, it deserves
sufficient attention in any discussion pertaining to the use of technol-
ogy in second-language teaching and learning. One point that cannot
be denied in mobile learning, almost to the point of being obvious, is
that the technology itself cannot be ignored. As much as a technology
may become “normalised” – that is, so much a normal part of their
repertoire of tools that learners do not need to think to pick it up in
much the same way as with a pen or notepad (Bax, 2003) – it is
essential to remember, as Levy (2002) reminds us, the technology is
“never transparent or inconsequential.” In other words, the technol-
ogy must have some impact on the context in which it is used, even if
the users (learners, teachers, researchers, administrators, and so forth)
are not consciously aware of it.
Technology will necessarily have an impact on research, both as a
means of conducting the research and also as the focus of the research.
Indeed, technology has made it easier to conduct research by giving us
insights into the learning process that would not normally be necessary
if not for the technology featuring in a study. Similarly, the relation-
ship between technology and practice is also an interdependent one.
Technology most certainly has an impact on practice, in that the way
that most things at the planning, preparing, execution, and evaluation
stages are impacted by the technology in some shape or form. This
includes, of course, the media or platform through which tasks are
administered and even the ways in which feedback is given to learners
based on their performance in both online and offline learning activ-
ities and events. As with research, this relationship can also be a
bidirectional one, and technologies themselves, in terms of the selec-
tion of a technology, the activities that are designed for use through a
technology, and the timing of using which technologies for what
purposes (in class, after class, desktop computers, mobile phones,
Moodle, or Blackboard, etc.) are all important decisions that need to
be made based on the way in which practitioners decide to undertake
practice. The cross-relationship between research and practice has
been discussed in so many fields over the past several decades, and it
is clear that there is a co-dependent relationship, where research affects
practice and vice versa. Research will more often than not be based on
determining best practice, and identifying how to improve upon prac-
tice through research is often one of the primary outcomes for carrying
out research in the first place. Similarly, practice will be changed based
on the results of research, sometimes relating in even further research,
causing an ongoing cycle of research and practice until the most
effective ways of undertaking practice can be found. Although this is
2.6 Research, Theory and Practice in MALL 41
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
an example of practice being altered by the outcomes of research, it
is also feasible that practice is modified in order to make it easier to
carry out research. In other words, varying practice could be a
means to an end – that is, a way of carrying out research that may
well have an impact once again on the way that practice is undertaken.
In this way, it is clear that each of the three elements of research,
practice, and technology have an interdependent relationship, where
changing any one of these elements will necessarily have an impact on
the other two.
The element that has not been mentioned yet, however, is theory.
What is the role of theory in the use of technology in second-language
teaching and learning? While this will be discussed in more depth in
Chapter 6, at this point, we can say that theory has an impact on the
way in which we view a learning situation, the choices of teaching
approach, the choices of materials, the choices of technology or tech-
nologies, the way in which the technologies and other teaching mater-
ials are used, the way in which research is collected, and the way in
which the results of such research are analysed and interpreted.
Therefore, it is safe to say that theory underlies everything that
happens in the teaching and learning context, and the selection of a
given theory or theories can shift some elements to the foreground and
others to the background. Practitioners have a need, then, to consider
the theory or theories that they have selected and to consider how they
might impact the views that may be held of the learning context. Views
that see the complexity of the entire environment have gained more
attention over the past several years (e.g., Larsen-Freeman &
Cameron, 2008), and this has enabled the consideration of the fact
that all of the different elements may contribute to outcomes, even
when they may not always be immediately obvious.
What is pertinent in considering the role of research, theory, and
practice in the field of MALL is that it would be a blatant overgeneral-
isation to try to put the technology into just a single category of tool.
The preceding discussion makes it very clear that the technology can
be used in a number of different ways, many of which are largely
unrelated to one another, and hence, an overarching theory, teaching
approach, or research agenda would simply not be possible. If we view
the technology as a reminder tool, as we might with push notifications
such as the learning reminders (e.g., Kennedy & Levy, 2008) or lists of
vocabulary that learners experienced difficulty with when undertaking
online vocabulary activities (Stockwell, 2013), then the ways in which
the technology is used – and, of course, the teaching approaches
and research methods – will necessarily be very different from when
using the technology as a communication tool for text or voice
42 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
communication, such as using it in reading and composing messages in
social networking (e.g., Tran, 2016). What becomes a challenge with
using mobile devices for practice and research, however, is the fact
that because learners are frequently engaged in activities as a part of
their everyday lives outside of the classroom, using their own mobile
devices, it is extremely difficult to get an accurate indication of how
they use the technology to engage in language learning. The issues of
research and theory are raised in more depth in Chapters 4 and 5,
respectively.
2.7 Summary
As the preceding discussion shows us, teaching and researching in
MALL has in many ways followed the path that CALL went down
some two decades earlier. MALL has been greatly influenced by
developments in technology, many of these being some of the most
remarkable seen over the past century in terms of processor speed and
stability, interactivity, and the ability to not only access but also create
multimedia resources. The fact that mobile learning now heavily relies
on learners using their own devices means that there is greater vari-
ation not only in the tools that they own but also in the skills they have
regarding the individual functions and features of their own devices.
While there are going to necessarily be differences in the capabilities
and functions of the devices owned by learners, more importantly, the
different skills and experiences that they learners possess can also lead
to a wider range of improvised affordances as they use trial and error
along with their own creativity to make the most of the designed
technical affordances. The sociomaterial impact on learners, the tech-
nology, and what learners do with technology have the potential to
shape learning, teaching, and the tools that they are using, as can be
seen in Chapter 3.
MALL is an extremely complex field that has certainly already
moved out of its infancy – it is more like a teenager primed to leap
into the wider world of language teaching and learning while looking
at its older sibling who is already making an impact on that world.
What is important to bear in mind is that mobile learning is more than
simply selecting or designing apps that learners can engage in alone or
just, outside of the classroom, and there are infinitely broader possi-
bilities regarding the ways in which learners can be encouraged to use
their own devices in a wider variety of ways, which can enable them to
take advantage of the broad range of technical affordances of the
device beyond apps. Given the sophistication of the devices that
learners carry around with them on a daily basis, the task of both
2.7 Summary 43
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
research and practice should be to capitalise upon these features so
that learners have more opportunities to engage with the target lan-
guage as a part of their daily lives.
2.8 Discussion Questions
1. Some people believe that mobile learning will replace learning
through other devices. What do you think of this view?
2. Mobile-assisted language learning is still considered a relatively
under-researched field, although there is already a large body of
research which has been undertaken. Why do you think this idea
persists?
3. A common belief is that learning through mobile devices refers only
to apps. Is this view understandable or acceptable? Why or
why not?
44 Fundamental Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
3 Shifting Paradigms in Language
Learning and Teaching
3.1 Introduction
There is no doubt that technology has had a profound impact on the
way learning and teaching are conceptualised. At the same time,
understanding this impact has proven to be difficult, as encapsulated
in the famous statement by Roy Amara in what is now known as
Amara’s law, that, “We tend to overestimate the effect of a technology
in the short run and underestimate the effect in the long run”
(VanDerLinden, 2014, p. 78). This also has been evident in education,
and language education is no exception. What it means today to be a
learner or a teacher is somewhat different from what it was as recently
as a decade or two ago, and technology has been one of the greatest
facilitators of this change. Coupled with a move towards learner-
centredness from the more traditional teacher-centred model in the
last thirty years (Cuban, 1993), teachers are relinquishing much of
their control over what and how learners learn. The reasons behind
this move have been varied, but one of the main tenets is that learners
are diverse and that a one-size-fits-all approach provided by many
teachers cannot be sufficiently flexible to meet the needs of the various
students in a single learning environment (Wenden, 2002). Allowing
for individuality has long been cited as one of the advantages of using
technology as well (e.g., Warschauer & Healey, 1998), so it is not
surprising to see that technology has in some ways become synonym-
ous with learner-centred approaches.
Deciding on specific methodologies that enable the learner to become
the centre of their own learning has proven to be difficult, and the ways
in which learner-centredness is implemented depend upon the
pedagogical perspectives of teachers (Beck, Czerniak & Lumpe, 2000;
Isikoglu, Basturk & Karaca, 2009; Minor, Onwuegbuzie, Witcher &
James, 2002). This has been compounded with the fact that teachers are
often needing to make decisions about using technology in their
45
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
language learning environments without sufficient training or experi-
ence (Hubbard & Levy, 2006). Teachers are aware of the potential of
technology in education but struggle to make the first steps in integrat-
ing it into their own teaching and learning. This load is not only one that
is felt by teachers. While there are indeed enabling factors that technol-
ogy can afford in educational contexts, institutional requirements to
use technology infer an added responsibility as well (García-Peñalvo &
Alier Forment, 2014), which is perceived by learners as even being a
burden (Marín Juarros, Salinas Ibáñez & de Benito Crosetti, 2014).
One of the underlying factors behind this burden is the assumption that
learners are expected to be active users of technology, with learning
technologies being provided to them based on the assumption that
learners are competent and willing users of technology as part of their
learning experience. Teachers may find themselves to be unwilling users
of technology, often as a result of executive decisions that pressure them
into using technologies that may not necessarily be the best fit for the
learning environment, and employ pedagogies that they do not fully
understand or particularly ascribe to (Hu & McGrath, 2011). The
following discussion describes the shift in roles for both learners and
teachers and explores the position of mobile technologies as both a
facilitator and supporter of this shift.
3.2 Shifting Roles for Learners
For learners, education has changed dramatically in terms of the ways
in which they engage in activities for learning, the outcomes of these
activities, the means of assessment, and even the goals of their language
learning. Change is inevitable in language teaching and learning – a fact
that was made all the more obvious with the COVID-19 outbreak – and
many of the broad range of language teaching approaches that have
been seen over the past century. Technological developments have had
a particularly marked impact on what happens in education settings,
some of which are more direct and others less so. The development of jet
engines, for example, meant that international travel became faster and
eventually more affordable, which gave rise to opportunities to visit
and spend time in countries and regions where different languages
are spoken. Guided also by changes in general views of psychology
in education, this contributed in a shift in teaching and learning
approaches away from methods of teaching language with a lower
focus on speaking such as grammar translation, and communication
was given much more attention (see Ellis, 1994; Morrow, 1981;
Savignon, 1983). Technologies such as cassette players and VHS
recorders made it easier to bring audiovisual materials into the
46 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
classroom, and this is likely to have had an impact on actual
classroom practice during the methods era of the 1950s through to
the 1980s, when teaching approaches that relied on more authentic
input became more widespread.
Technological advances have contributed to not only the practice of
what happens in the classroom but also the goals of learning itself. Just
as jet airplanes have made travel to different language communities
more accessible, this type of travel has also impacted the focus of
language study – that is, to use language to communicate with others
from these communities. More recently, learners have also been
affected by how technology is being used in education, and at the
same time, have moved towards electronic tools as preferred means of
using the target language. Technological developments have impacted
the role of learners in terms of both the processes and products of
learning a language (Levy, 2002), but this has gained even greater
relevance over the past several years. Changes in the processes
result directly to how learning takes place; technology is becoming
an integral part of the entire learning process in the shape of learner
management systems (e.g., Blake, 2016), MOOCs (e.g., Martín-Monje
& Bárcena, 2014), virtual online communities (Sockett & Toffoli,
2012), and so forth. In contrast, products refer to what learners are
now required to create as a part of their course of language study.
Handwritten essays may be replaced by online writing methods such
as blogs (e.g., Fellner & Apple, 2006; Pinkman, 2005), face-to-face
collaboration may be supplemented with social networking tools such
as Twitter (Leis, 2014), and paper-based quizzes may be replaced by
online quizzes that are automatically graded (Fageeh, 2015).
Since information and communications technologies (ICT) have
become an integral part of the interactions that many of us take part
in on daily basis, face-to-face communication is no longer the only
option available to language learners, and in many cases, it is not even
the preferred option. People commonly engage in electronic communi-
cation with others more and more frequently, where they can interact
in different languages in written and spoken forms without needing to
travel at all. Language learners are becoming language users in diverse
multilingual contexts – exploiting their full range of linguistic
resources while using language creatively to communicate through
translanguaging (García & Li, 2014), but also through personal devel-
opment (Leung & Scarino, 2016). Expectations of acquisition of
languages, then, have seen a shift from striving towards native-
speaking norms to include communicating with others who may also
be learners of the languages that they share (e.g., Cook, 2016). This
type of communication is particularly evident in predominantly
3.2 Shifting Roles for Learners 47
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
English online communities like Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram,
where people may come together to share their views about mutual
interests. It is not surprising to see that the objectives for learning a
language by many learners have moved towards participation in these
communities, and there are learners who (initially at least) may have
no great desire to travel to regions where the languages that they
choose to learn are spoken but, rather, to interact online with commu-
nities of people through the language. This is particularly evident with
learners of English, largely due to the strong presence of English as a
lingua franca in many regards on the Internet, but there are also strong
communities of Chinese, French, and Spanish, to name a few. As a
result, despite the movement towards oral communication from trad-
itional written approaches such as grammar translation, there are
learners now who are honing their skills in written communication,
using tools such as SNS and text messaging tools. Technology has also
become central in communication, disseminating and gathering infor-
mation, and even entertainment, uses which may coincide with
learners’ ultimate aims of using a second language.
These different products place a burden on learners to be familiar
with the tools that are used to create them. While many learners are
familiar with personal uses of technology, there is evidence that sug-
gests that not all learners are willing and/or able to use them for
learning purposes, despite the claims made by the so-called digital
natives metaphor (Bodsworth & Goodyear, 2017), they need sufficient
training to use technologies for learning (Hubbard, 2004). Creating
the optimum learning environment for these learners is dependent
upon this understanding that learners are not homogenously equipped
to deal with the changes in education that technology has brought
with them and, at the same time, realising that the goals that the
learners bring with them may differ greatly to the goals that were held
by their teachers when they were themselves learners.
3.3 Shifting Roles for Teachers
As described in the introduction of this chapter, changes in technology
have meant that there are different demands on teachers in many
aspects, some of which have the potential to impact the very concept
of what teaching is. Virtually all aspects of education have been
affected in some way, including the ways that students enrol; the
ways that classes are conducted, assessed, and evaluated; the ways
that students search for, collect, and collate information; the ways that
teachers and students interact; the ways that grades are calculated and
notified to students; and the ways that teachers receive and deal with
48 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
feedback from students – just to name a few. Given this enormous shift
over the past several years, it is not surprising that some teachers have
had difficulty adjusting to these changes, in the midst of a need to keep
up with the developments that are taking place on an ongoing basis
and to be aware of the various implications that these changes entail.
The impact of COVID-19 in this regard has also been phenomenal,
with the majority of teachers being thrust into situations where their
only alternative is to teach through technology even though this was
unthinkable to most just weeks before the outbreak. The changes
brought about by COVID-19 are indeed enormous, and this point
could be emphasised at various points throughout this book, but I will
leave this discussion to Chapter 9, where some of the considerations
are discussed in more depth. Education has been in flux for some
decades, and although these have been compounded by the pandemic,
the issues discussed in what follows have been in the background for a
very long time.
Such is the scale of the shift that technology has brought to educa-
tion over the past thirty years, there are those who question the very
nature of what it means to learn – such as Dikkers (2014), who
suggests that there is a need to think about whether the current model
of teaching, learning, and testing is relevant when learners can quickly
look up information using mobile devices that are readily available to
them. One common response by teachers to this change is to express
fear about the relevance of their jobs in the future, and there are many
teachers who worry that they can be replaced by technology. They feel
threatened not only by the technology but also by teachers who are
more proficient users of the technology than themselves and, in some
cases, even by the learners, who they see as being more competent with
technology than they are themselves. The identity that teachers possess
of themselves in the learning process plays a central role in their
success (see Dörnyei & Kubanyiova, 2014), and this links directly to
the confidence to appropriately perform the tasks required in each of
these capacities.
The motivations for teachers to use technology in the classroom are
varied; some are prompted by external factors such as the institution,
and some are internal, such as a desire to use a technology in their
teaching and learning contexts, although this may also be prompted
more by a sense of needing to rather than wanting to. The impact of
teacher motivation for using technology should not be underesti-
mated, as it will have a direct influence on what and how technologies
are used and the longevity of their use (see Stockwell, 2013). For
example, if a teacher is using a technology that is imposed upon them
by their institution without a clear understanding of how and why
3.3 Shifting Roles for Teachers 49
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
they should be using it, then there is a greater chance that they will be
less likely to integrate it into their teaching in any meaningful manner.
This will have a direct influence on learner attitudes to the technology,
as learners are often expected to try to use it without sufficient
guidance or explanation.
Teacher training with technology has been a topic that has featured
quite heavily in the literature since the mid-2000s, and there has been
increased awareness of the need to ensure that teachers are sufficiently
trained to be able to use technology effectively. While the issue of
learner training comes up in Chapter 7, it is important to bear in mind
that learner training is inseparable from teacher training (see Hubbard
& Levy, 2006). As with many other aspects pertaining to the use of
technology in teaching and learning, it is important to bear in mind
that the complexities of teacher training are compounded depending
on whether it takes place in pre-service or in-service contexts
(Table 3.1).
Teachers in each of these categories are likely to encounter different
types of problems with integrating technology into their own contexts.
Table 3.1 Overview of teacher experience with training in technology
Category Typical Characteristics
Pre-service teachers Recent university graduates
Have familiarity with private uses of technologies
Inexperienced in teaching
May have used technology in own education
May have received/will receive some training in
technology
Early in-service teachers Recent university graduates
Have familiarity with private uses of technologies
Some experience in teaching
May have used technology in own education
May have received some pre-service training in
technology
Experienced in-service
teachers
Graduated from university some time ago
May have familiarity with private uses of
technologies
Experienced in teaching
Unlikely to have used technology in own education
Unlikely to have received pre-service training in
technology
50 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Pre-service teachers are frequently younger and are generally familiar
with using technologies as an integrated part of their own daily lives.
They have also likely experienced the use of technology from a stu-
dent’s perspective and, as such, have some idea of what it feels like to
use a technology as a student and understand some of the problems
that learners might encounter. At the same time, they are also likely to
be inexperienced as teachers, and this means that even if they under-
stand how to use technology (for private purposes at least), they may
not be aware of how technology use might fit into the larger teaching
context. They may have received some training in the use of technol-
ogy as a part of the pre-service education, but, as still relatively
inexperienced teachers, they may experience difficulties in seeing
how technology can be used in achieving certain teaching and learning
goals.
Early in-service teachers who are recent graduates are likely to face
some overlapping benefits and difficulties but may have different
problems compared with pre-service teachers. They are likely to have
experienced using technology as a learner in the same way as pre-
service teachers and be familiar with using technologies for private
purposes. They may have received some degree of pre-service training
with using technologies, which may give them some idea of where to
start when adopting technology in their teaching and learning con-
texts. They would be expected to have more teaching experience than
pre-service teachers but may still be getting used to their context and
working out relationships with administration and other, more senior
teachers, which may somehow restrict their attempts to use technolo-
gies in their teaching contexts.
Experienced in-service teachers who graduated more than ten to
twenty years ago would be expected to face a different range of
problems. While they may be familiar with technologies for personal
uses, they are less likely to have experience with using technology as a
student as a part of their own studies. This does not necessarily mean
that they are less competent users of technology, but that they have not
been in the position of student, at least as far as their own formal
studies are concerned. In contrast, however, they would be expected to
be experienced teachers who know how to deliver content effectively
as well as to design a range of tasks and activities, but they may feel
some apprehension with regards to delivering these through
technology.
Teacher training can occur at a range of different points throughout
a teacher’s career, but it is apparent that it is difficult for teachers to
acquire the skills that they need to use technology in their teaching and
learning context without some kind of support, such as formal
3.3 Shifting Roles for Teachers 51
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
training or assistance from a mentor (Stockwell, 2010). Experience
with technology has been a notoriously bad predictor of technology
adoption, as has been suggested by Tour (2015), who points out that
teachers who have experience with technologies are likely to apply the
same technologies to their own teaching and learning contexts as well,
and Kessler (2007), who proposes that teachers with moderate experi-
ence with technology are more likely to integrate it into their language
courses than those with higher or lower amounts of experience.
Therefore, it is apparent that it is not technical skills in themselves
that play a role in facilitating broad or integrated technology usage
but, rather, other factors that are more related to the support that
teachers can receive as they make decisions about what and how
technology is used in their learning environments.
The content of courses on technology for both pre-service and in-
service teachers has been an area of increasing interest over the past
several years, and there have been several books (e.g., Hubbard &
Levy, 2006; Son, 2018; Son & Windeatt, 2017) and journal articles
(e.g., El Shaban & Egbert, 2018; Son et al., 2017; Stockwell &
Reinders, 2019) that allude to the importance of this topic. One
consistent outcome that has been that teachers typically have difficul-
ties in integrating technology into their teaching and learning without
some degree of support (Robb, 2006; Stockwell, 2010), and being able
to work with others who have experience in using technology in
the early stages of experimenting makes it possible to remove much
of the unnecessary trial and error and “reinventing of the wheel,”
where teachers rediscover problems that have already arisen in previ-
ous studies due to failing to explore what has already been published
in the literature. One thing that also becomes apparent is the fact that
while teachers need to have skills in using certain technologies that
they use in their teaching, it is not feasible for pre-service and in-service
courses to provide information about all available technologies that
teachers may wish to use. Instead, courses need to lead teachers to
understanding the possibilities with technologies so that they can
make decisions about what to use from the ever-increasing range of
technologies that are available to them.
While the three categories presented here are intended as more
indicative than definitive, they serve to illustrate the potential relation-
ship between teaching experience and training with technology to use
in teaching. Teachers who are currently in education or have recently
completed education are more likely to have had some kind of hands-
on experience using technology as a part of their own teaching and
learning or possibly even some direct instruction as a part of their
teacher training course. These experiences may form the foundation
52 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
for what they do in their own classrooms in the future, but there is the
limitation that any negative experiences may translate into reduced
enthusiasm for using technology in their own language teaching con-
texts. Regardless of experience with technology or with teaching, there
are teachers who embrace technology in their teaching environments
and are eager to try new tools in order to enhance their teaching and
learning contexts, but there are also those who feel far more reluctant
to do so, as discussed in the following section.
From the Field: Resistance to Technology
I have seen many experienced teachers with long teaching careers show
reluctance to adopt new technologies into their teaching contexts. When
talking with these teachers, the reasons are largely divided into three main
overlapping categories. The first reason is that they don’t believe that
technology can add anything more to their current teaching environment
than they already have. This belief generally stems from either a lack of
knowledge of what technological tools and resources are available or a
resistance to try to use something that they are unfamiliar with in their
teaching. The second reason is that they have a fear that their learners are
more capable of using technologies than they are, and as a result, they feel
that they will not be able to explain how to use them or respond to questions
should they need to provide technical support for the learners. The third
reason is related to a lack of motivation to change current teaching practice
because there is no particular external motivation to do so. That is to say,
they are aware of the fact that developing and using new teaching materials
will take considerable time and effort, but as long as the institution does not
place pressure on them to change, they are happy to devote their available
time to other duties required of them as a part of their job. Each of these are
understandable perspectives, but suitable counterarguments could also be
made in each case. Learning how to use new tools without training is an
extremely difficult undertaking, but there are academic communities that can
be sought out to assist with this effort. Similar, supporting learners with new
technologies that teachers are unfamiliar with can also be daunting, but
learners will typically not know how to effectively use technology for learning
purposes unless they have received sufficient guidance from teachers.
Finally, teachers are indeed busy, and deciding whether or not to incorporate
technology is a matter of priority. Although teachers may see the value of
using technology in their teaching and learning environments, they might feel
that it is a low priority compared with other things that they need to do within
their busy work schedule.
3.3 Shifting Roles for Teachers 53
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
3.4 Resistance to Technology Use in Education
The factors influencing teachers’ reluctance to using technology in
their teaching environments are varied but have been linked most
commonly to a lack of conviction that technology can contribute to
their teaching in any meaningful method and the feeling that there is
insufficient support for them to be trained in using technologies
(Ertmer, Gopalakrishnan & Ross, 2001; Fang, 1996; Liu, 2011;
Pelgrum, 2001; Stockwell, 2009). While resistance certainly seems to
persist in specific contexts based on teachers’ confidence and even the
culture of the environment (Ertner & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010;
Wang, 2020), there is also evidence to suggest that there has been
a shift in attitudes towards keeping up with changes in access to
technology inside and outside of the classroom, changes in student
attitudes towards technology, and changes in curriculum where tech-
nology is taking on a more central role (Ertmer et al., 2012).
Maintaining a healthy distrust of technology in education, however,
is likely to lead to more realistic and successful learning outcomes than
will believing that technology will necessarily benefit learning (Selwyn,
2014). To this end, provided that resistance does not lead to unwar-
ranted rejection of technology when it could be a viable option, taking
time to consider the pros and cons of technology in teachers’ specific
environments would be desirable.
Resistance to mobile devices is often due to overlapping but quite
different reasons from other technologies. Institutionally, manage-
ment’s attitudes towards the use of mobile technologies – particularly
mobile phones – will have an impact on technology use. Many pre-
tertiary schools (i.e., elementary, junior, and/or senior high schools)
have a negative attitude towards the use of mobile phones in schools
and ban their use in school, often based on fears that learners will use
them inappropriately during school time. In these contexts, even if
teachers desire to use the technology, it is extremely difficult to do so
because they need both institutional and parental permission, which is
not always easy to obtain. Studies have reported that parents have
often prevented their children from studying on mobile devices
because they believe that they are playing rather than studying, and
this is extremely difficult to monitor (see Huang, Chen & Chou,
2016). This view is often reflected in teachers’ view of learners using
their mobile devices in class, as they are concerned that mobile devices
will be an extra distraction in the classroom, resulting in teachers
restricting or even banning their usage.
At a class level, many teachers fear that if learners have access to
mobile devices like mobile phones, they will not engage in required
54 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
activities but, rather, use their devices for private purposes such as
social networking or Internet surfing (Grimshaw, Cardoso & Collins,
2017). It is true that the device itself can be a distraction for “cyber-
slacking” (Flanigan & Kiewra, 2018), but the classroom was not void
of distractions before the event of mobile devices. It was commonplace
for students to have their eyes fixed outside the window, on each
other, passing messages when the teacher wasn’t looking, or simply
daydreaming. Although mobile devices do allow learners to “look out
the window” through the screen of their device or pass messages
electronically, it is questionable whether or not it is entirely the fault
of the device that learners engage in this type of behaviour. One would
assume that failing to concentrate is a product of boredom and
is facilitated by the technology rather than behaviour that is entirely
prompted by the technology. It would be difficult to make strong
conclusions one way or the other about the bilateral nature of this
relationship, but at the very least, it may prove beneficial to take
measures to change teaching practice rather than blanket banning a
potentially useful tool for what teachers fear might happen.
While this might seem to be a rather severe perspective, as has been
pointed out before, the nature of teaching and learning is changing,
and teaching learners with methods that do not suit the ways in which
they are accustomed to or expecting might lead to this type of bore-
dom. In other words, if learners do not see sufficient relationship
between what is happening in the classroom and the attainment of
their goals (which may or may not be clear to even the learners
themselves), then they are less likely to direct their attention to the
task at hand. This could be a product of learners who feel that they can
search for the information that they require by themselves without
needing to engage class activities, but this confidence often means that
they confuse the difference between “googling” for straightforward
information rather than conducting research at a deeper level (Weibe,
2016). At the same time, many learners feel that they are quite capable
of multitasking and can look at their phones or other mobile devices
while still taking in the content of the class. There is research to suggest
that when learners spent time looking at their devices while attending
lectures, they were able to retain far less of the content than classmates
that did not (Ophir, Nass & Wagner, 2009; see Chapter 6). Being
made aware of the difference in perspective compared with the reality
of using mobile devices is something that learners themselves may
benefit from and may have some impact on effecting a change in
learner behaviour.
Regardless of the existence of or the reasons behind learners’
undesirable use of mobile devices in learning settings, what is certain
3.4 Resistance to Technology Use in Education 55
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
is that the role of the teacher is changing and, indeed, must accommo-
date different tools and different expectations with these tools. In a
world where information is readily available to learners at the touch of
a keyboard or screen, the role of the teacher as predominantly a
provider information needs to undergo a shift into more as a curator
of information (Potter, 2012). Curators will act in much the same way
in educational terms as they might as curators of an art gallery or
museum. As most people are aware, art galleries and museums have a
far greater collection of items than the ones that are on display, and it
is up to the curator to make decisions about what items to show and
how to display them in such a way that they are easy for visitors to
understand. In education – particularly with regards to the Internet,
where the sheer volume of resources can be overwhelming to learners –
the teacher’s job includes putting together relevant resources in a way
that they are comprehensible to learners and, as a result, far easier for
learners to make sense of them, particularly if they are annotated with
supporting information. Curation can take on yet another meaning
with mobile devices. Downloading enormous chunks of information
to a mobile device can be overwhelming to sift through, given the
technological affordances (see Chapter 6 for a discussion of screen
size, speed, storage capacity, etc.), meaning that information that is
made to available on mobile devices should be curated in a way that it
is appropriate to the devices that will be used to access it (Udell, 2015).
Curation is far from an easy task, as it entails the teacher understand-
ing the range of resources that are available and the devices owned by
learners, as well as sufficient preparation time. Nonetheless, if learners
have access to a curated list of resources suitable for their mobile
devices, it is likely they will be able to have a more enriching experi-
ence than they would if trying to seek out and sift through resources
on their own.
The changes that we’ve seen over the past several decades have had
an enormous impact on the ways in which we teach and learn not only
language but also other aspects of education. Even if future changes in
technologies are relatively minor in the foreseeable future, it is likely
that the changes that we have seen to date will continue to transform
the way we teach, impart, store and retrieve information; interact; and
even form relationships between the various actors involved in the
teaching and learning process.
An issue that deserves attention is the development of specific digital
literacies that both teachers and learners need to develop in order to
teach effectively using technology (e.g., Lawrence, 2014). The shift in
literacies that are required by teachers in an era where technology is
becoming central to much of what happens in and out of the
56 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
classroom is one that has appeared in the literature with increased
frequency over the past several years. The term “digital literacy” has
come to include a range of individual skills and related literacies such
as information literacy (the ability to seek and organize information)
(Weibe, 2016), multimodal literacy (the ability to deal with informa-
tion that comes through multiple modes) (Lotherington & Jenson,
2011), and media literacy (the ability to evaluate the credibility of
sources and to create new messages based on the information taken
from these sources) (Buckingham, 2007). The problem of how
teachers can be trained in these literacies, however, remains an
extremely important point.
3.5 Mobile Learning in Formal and Informal Learning
Contexts
The context in which mobile learning takes place will have an impact
on various aspects of how learning takes place. While most research
into mobile learning relates to formal learning contexts, the wide-
spread availability of mobile apps for informally learning a language
makes it an area greatly in need of further study. In reality, it is likely
that learning in informal contexts is more commonplace in reality than
in formal learning, although the nature of mobile learning in this
manner makes it extremely difficult to research in a systematic
manner, as will be discussed in more depth in Chapter 4.
Though it has been argued that the formal and informal are along a
continuum rather than distinct categories (Hubbard, 2020), there are
still several points that separate learning in informal contexts from
learning in formal ones. Not the least of these is that the purposes for
undertaking the study in the first place, which will typically be more
intrinsic in informal learning contexts than in formal ones. That is to
say, when mobile devices are used to learn for personal, intrinsic
reasons, learners are likely to study in a less systematic way than might
be done in formal contexts (Marsick & Watkins, 2001). This will have
an impact on the selection of the tools and the ways that they are used.
For example, learners in informal settings may select apps based on the
order that they appear in online app repositories such as the App Store
or Google Play and make evaluations about these apps from early
impressions of usability. If they find a tool to be difficult to use in the
first few instances of trying it out, it is possible that they will quickly
abandon usage and try another app to see if it appears to fulfil their
needs. On the one hand, this is not necessarily a bad way to select
learning tools in one sense, in that learners can try a range of tools to
3.5 Mobile Learning 57
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
see what is suited to them. But on the other hand, there is also the
danger that potentially useful tools may be abandoned before learning
how to use them properly, and opportunities for language learning
may be lost.
Training in how to use apps and other mobile-based tools can go a
long way towards ensuring that learners can get the most out of their
learning endeavours, which can help them to maintain higher levels of
motivation. Related to this is the fact that informal learning contexts
often lack clear goals, making it is difficult to maintain motivation in
the long term, which can have a negative impact on sustainability of
task engagement. Formalised learning environments can make it easier
for learners to have clearer short-term goals that they can work
towards, rather than larger, more nebulous goals that might be asso-
ciated with informal learning. For example, when asking learners
about their overarching language learning goals, they often respond
with “communicating with friends,” “watching movies without sub-
titles,” or even “chatting online.” These goals are certainly reasonable
goals to have, but most learners are unable to pinpoint what is that
they specifically need to do in order to achieve them, which can result
in different types of behaviours with using mobile technologies for
learning than might be the case in formal ones. It is for this reason that
there has been increased interest in the balance between formal and
informal learning, where both can contribute to ultimate success in
language learning if applied appropriately (Godwin-Jones, 2018;
Hubbard, 2020; Kukulska-Hulme, 2015; Lai, 2019). While there
may be similar underlying long-term goals in each type of learning,
teachers can play a role in directing learners towards clearer short-
term goals (e.g., studying for a vocabulary test, undertaking
specific listening activities, or completing grammar exercises) that
will ultimately contribute to achieving long-term personal goals.
These may be done in part through mobile devices or through a
combination of online and offline methods, but even just having more
tangible goals may lead learners to engage in activities in a different
way, even if they supplement their learning with selecting apps of their
own volition.
Another issue that may impact learners’ ability to engage in self-
directed language learning is their proficiency level, particularly with
regards to using mobile devices as a primary tool. There are apps and
other mobile-based activities that are better suited towards lower
levels, and the online stores seem to be filled with apps for
beginning-level learners but offer very few targeted towards learners
of a higher proficiency, a fact which has been bemoaned by many
intermediate- or advanced-level learners who have difficulty finding
58 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
appropriate apps to assist them with their language learning. Lower-
level learners may find the apps and online learning resources that are
available to them will satisfy their immediate learning needs but then
run into difficulties when they reach higher levels. Also, the instruc-
tional design that is embedded in learning resources designed for
lower-level learners will often be of less importance than for learners
of a higher proficiency. That is to say, the role of the teacher in training
learners how to use the resources more effectively is likely to have a
greater impact as learners reach higher levels of proficiency, as they
would be expected to find that simple presentation of vocabulary lists
or grammar manipulation exercises will be less useful when they are
trying to develop communicative competence in the target language.
Of course, the role that mobile devices can play in achieving this is also
an extremely important one and will be dealt with in more depth in
Chapters 6 and 8.
Finally, motivation to learn and previous language learning experi-
ence can be related to the issue of autonomy in language learning, an
area which has received a great deal of attention over the past several
years (e.g., Benson, 2013; Benson & Voller, 2013). As learners engage
in language learning activities, possessing a balance of motivation to
continually sustain their use of activities along with the skills needed to
make the most out of their use will have a direct impact on their
effectiveness in leading to language learning gains. Those learners
who have had experience in using apps or other online learning
resources to learn a language may find that they can apply these skills
to learning a new language. However, this will depend on the avail-
ability of apps for different languages, and, of course, there is great
disparity in this regard, with an abundance of resources for some
languages, such as English and Spanish, and considerably less for
languages such as Croatian and Thai. In this case, even if learners
have experience in using online resources or apps, when such
resources do not exist for the target language, those skills are no longer
applicable. In this case, even motivated learners may find it difficult to
maintain their motivation or to study autonomously if they have
difficulty in finding resources that meet their language learning needs.
What criteria do learners typically apply to mobile resource selec-
tion such as language learning apps? There has been a small amount of
research carried out to date that looks at how learners make decisions
about which apps to use for learning purposes when they are left to
make these decisions on their own. Some researchers have noted that
learners will generally choose price as the first criteria, opting to use
free options before considering paid options (Kim, 2013; Stockwell,
2008). The free option may be a free trial version of a fully paid
3.5 Mobile Learning 59
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
version, but the free version usually only includes a sample of content,
limited functionality, or both, and it is often based on this where
learners decide whether or not they will purchase the full version,
but the position of the mobile device in the larger learning context
will have an impact on whether learners decide to go ahead with
purchasing it or other alternatives. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that there are many learners of a language who have multiple
free versions of apps installed on their mobile devices, the majority of
which are rarely used.
Another problem is that in many cases, learners will typically choose
apps that target the more “obvious” aspects of a language such as
vocabulary or, in the case of script languages like Chinese, orthog-
raphy, with little emphasis on development of other skills such as
listening or pronunciation. In many cases, this is because learners are
not aware of what they really need in order to develop their skills in
the target language, and consequently, vocabulary just tends to be the
skill that is the easiest to notice improvement and the easiest to study,
where rote learning would be thought to result in at least some degree
of language development. This is not a type of behaviour that is
peculiar to mobile learning, as many learners will simply create
vocabulary lists and study them repeatedly in the hope that this will
help develop their entire language proficiency. In one sense, of course,
learning vocabulary does have the potential to contribute to the devel-
opment of other skills (Miralpeix & Muñoz, 2018), but learners are
more likely to retain vocabulary items when there are opportunities to
see them used in context (e.g., Feng & Webb, 2019), which is rare in
mobile-based self-study vocabulary apps.
What criteria, then, should learners apply to selection of apps or
other resources for their private language learning? This is a difficult
skill to acquire without some support, and this is likely one of the
reasons that many learners do not find it easy to sustain unaided
learning with mobile devices. One of the greatest limitations for
learners is understanding what aspects of the language that they need
to focus on to learn the language successfully. As described earlier,
when left to their own devices, learners will typically focus on vocabu-
lary, which is likely to be also the area in which they possess the
greatest experience. And this is where there appears to be the greatest
concentration of apps and resources available, particularly those that
would be suited to mobile devices.
As stated before, learning in formal learning environments takes on
a rather different form when compared with informal ones. Perhaps
the most obvious of these is that in formal learning contexts, learning
goals are typically set by teachers, and the burden for finding and
60 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
evaluating resources is placed more heavily on the teacher rather than
on the learner. This, of course, depends on the teacher’s ability to
choose from the wide range of available resources. The primary
advantage that the teacher would be thought to have over learners is
an educated view of what skills the learners need to acquire in order to
be successful in their language learning and, as such, may be more
likely to suggest a wider range of resources that learners can use in
a systematic way in order to have sufficient opportunity to learn
different aspects of the language rather than simply focussing on
vocabulary.
In addition to this, learning through formal contexts where the use
of mobile devices is a central part of the learning tools will usually
mean that there is a more solid support framework in place. This
support can take several forms, but the most likely areas in which this
support would be apparent would be in the selection of the appropri-
ate learning tools suited to the learners’ level and needs and in the
training to provide the learners with the skills to use these tools in an
effective manner. The types of training will be dealt with Chapter 7,
but there is already evidence to suggest that providing with learners
with ongoing training that not only shows the functions of the tech-
nology but also how to use these functions for language learning
purposes can lead to a higher degree of task engagement and advances
in language skills (Stockwell & Hubbard, 2014). This type of training
in formal contexts may have an impact on learners’ ability to engage in
tasks and activities in informal contexts as well, but this will obviously
depend on the type of training the learners are provided with. To that
end, formal training is potentially a step leading to the ability to also
use mobile resources in informal contexts. Not only that, but perhaps
it would be more appropriate to say that a part of training in formal
contexts should include an element of training learners to be able to
make appropriate decisions about what tools to use and how to use
them without support from teachers in more informal learning
situations.
A look at the ways in which mobile technologies have been com-
bined with non-mobile ones can give us some insights into the ways in
which mobile technologies can complement the range of tools that are
available to learners. For example, MOOCs have been optimised for
accessibility through not only desktop and laptop computers but also
through mobile devices. One of the tenets of offering this type of access
is to enable learners to progress easily and seamlessly regardless of
where they are (Sharples, 2014). Sharples, Delgado Kloos, Dimitriadis,
Garlatti and Specht (2015) argue that the nature of mobile devices
makes them conducive to providing the type of seamless learning that
3.5 Mobile Learning 61
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Sharples describes as, “connecting learning activities distributed over
time, space and social settings” (p. 2). While our understanding of
learning through MOOCs is still deepening as the potential of how the
mobile aspect of learning through technology can relate to learning
through other technologies (see Jitpaisarnwattana, Reinders &
Darasawang, 2019), Sharples and his colleagues propose that the
mobile part of the learning should be a link between other platforms,
which can allow learners to maintain their motivation to engage in
learning on an ongoing basis. In this way, they consider that MOOCs
may not be something that is conducted entirely through mobile
devices, but that mobile devices make it easier to keep learners
engaged in the learning and allow them to have access to tools that
can keep them connected to the content and to others involved in the
learning process such as discussion forums or supporters
(Friðriksdóttir, 2018). In this way, it is believed that the use of mobile
devices may contribute to lowering attrition rates in MOOCs through
keeping a closer relationship between the learner, the content, and the
learning community.
Using mobile devices as a part of flipped classrooms has also
attracted attention. There is still a general lack of a standard when it
comes to describing what flipped classrooms are (Abeysekera &
Dawson, 2015), but in essence, flipped classrooms enable learners to
engage in activities outside of class that allow for in-class discussion to
deepen understanding of points learners have encountered in their
own learning. The role of mobile devices in flipped classrooms is
varied and can include promoting problem-based learning, individual
and group collaborative project-based learning, peer assessment, and
peer competition (Hwang, Lai & Wang, 2015). These activities are
anticipated to help learners to stay engaged even when they are not
directly supervised by the teacher and, thus, to extend the amount of
time that learners spend on task and perhaps even encourage learners
to engage more in self-directed preview learning (Wang, 2016). While
researchers have suggested that flipped learning may be a means of
helping learners to achieve autonomy (Han, 2015), it should be noted
that flipped classrooms, despite being based on a solid concept of
encouraging learners to take advantage of time more efficiently and
effectively, also require a certain degree of self-directedness to be
successful in the first place, and if learners lack this, it is unlikely that
they will be able to benefit from this potential (Zainudden & Perera,
2019). Thus, the use of flipped classrooms may be seen as being a
chicken-and-egg situation, where it is uncertain how autonomous
learners are at the outset when engaging in this approach and how
62 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
their autonomy may be developed through the use of flipped
classrooms. What can be said, however, is that mobile devices would
be thought to play an important ongoing role, in that they can keep
learners’ minds on tasks at any time and location, changing the
idea from learning as being something that just takes place in the
classroom.
Educational gaming is another area where mobile devices are
thought to be able to play a role in language learning, and sugges-
tions have been made that games can help motivate learners to
engage in activities when other methods lose their appeal (e.g.,
Liu, Navarrete & Wivagg, 2014). For example, Hwang, Shih, Ma,
Shadiev, and Chen (2016) found that having learners complete
games on mobile devices helped learners to develop their verbal
skills more than when the activities were completed through trad-
itional methods, as they engaged in the activities with greater regu-
larity, giving them more opportunity to reflect on their speech. It is
this aspect which is considered as one of the areas of most potential
for educational gaming through mobile devices such as mobile
phones. If the game has sufficient educational content, encouraging
learners to engage in it regularly, due to the “addictive” gaming
element, learners are more likely to benefit more from it. A major
difficulty that developers face, however, is how to maintain the
balance between the educational component and the gaming com-
ponent. If the focus on the game is more on the educational side,
then it might not capture the learners to engage in them sufficiently,
and if the game is more focussed on the entertainment side without
enough educational content, then even with extensive usage, it is
unlikely to bring with it sufficient learning benefit. There have been
several examples of mobile-based learning games that have been
developed by researchers over the last few years. The context-aware
Handheld English Language Learning Organization (HELLO) tool
from Liu and Chu (2010) included a gaming element which led to
enhanced motivation compared with when the games were not used,
and Palomo-Duarte, Berns, Cejas, Dodero, Caballero, and Ruiz-
Rube (2016) suggested that the gaming element of their interactive
app designed for Spanish learners of German called GuessIt! caused
learners to engage in tasks more regularly. While both of these
examples show the potential for gaming to sustain learner inter-
action in activities, research into educational gaming is still plagued
by the fact that many of the studies tend to be carried out over
relatively short periods of time, and the long-term effect on engage-
ment is still largely unknown.
3.5 Mobile Learning 63
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
3.6 Summary
While it is impossible to cover here all of the changes that have taken
place in teaching and learning as a result of developments in technol-
ogy over past several decades, the discussion aims to illustrate the
complexity of the various elements that are intertwined to form the
educational context that many of us find ourselves in today. Learners
are being expected to take on more and more responsibility for their
own learning, and while some embrace the freedom that this might
entail, others feel frustration and apprehension regarding how to go
about their learning without sufficient guidance and support.
Similarly, teachers are finding themselves in a position where pressure
is being placed on them to provide this support without the technical
skills and training necessary to deal with problems that may occur
with these technologies. Teachers who have received education using
technology themselves will be more likely to have less resistance to
incorporating technology into their own teaching, but experience with
learning through technology as a learner is not an accurate indicator
of innovative or appropriate use of technology as a teacher.
Technologies – and mobile devices in particular – have become such
an integral part of our everyday lives that we surround ourselves with
them at most times. Taking advantage of this constant access to these
technologies can help bridge the gap between formal and informal
learning contexts, which can ultimately reinforce one another through
consolidating both long-term and short-term learning goals. The range
of options available to teachers and learners is constantly increasing,
which necessitates adjustment to the changing environment regarding
the roles of both formal and informal learning in the larger learning
context. Many of the changes in education in the foreseeable future are
likely predictable to a certain extent as we familiarise ourselves with the
availability and functionality of the technologies that we use on a day-
to-day basis. What paradigm shifts will be brought by emerging tech-
nologies such as virtual and augmented reality, wearable technologies,
and artificial intelligence (see Chapter 9), however, remain to be seen.
Education is a field that will continue to make the most of technological
developments, and the face of teaching and learning will reflect these
with constantly evolving roles for educators and students alike.
3.7 Discussion Questions
1. The belief that increased access to learning resources through
mobile devices will result in learners being able to study effectively
64 Shifting Paradigms in Language Learning & Teaching
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
is widespread. What do you think of this view? Why do you
think so?
2. Imagine that you have a colleague who is reluctant to use technol-
ogy in the classroom, despite there being abundant resources avail-
able. Do you think that you could convince your colleague to adopt
technology? If so, how? If not, why not?
3. Can you think of a concrete example of where formal and informal
learning could be effectively integrated with one another? What do
you see as the role of mobile devices in achieving this?
3.7 Discussion Questions 65
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
4 Research Considerations in MALL
4.1 Introduction
One of the primary purposes of research is to better understand why
something happens. This can be to get insights into the ways in which
people think, why people behave in a certain way, and the factors that
influence this thinking and behaviour. Regardless of the shapes or
forms it may take, the ultimate objective of research into teaching
and learning is to understand the process better in order to improve
upon it. Despite this seemingly straightforward goal, research itself is
an extremely complex process that needs to take into consideration the
entire range of factors that may affect the outcomes. Egbert (2005,
p. 5) describes research as being “studies that take an analytic
approach by looking at one or more . . . variables [of context, task,
tool, language, and people] in any number of ways or studies that look
at the system of which these variables are a part, at their interactions
and complexities and their effects on each other.” The relationship
between instruction and learning has long been considered a complex
one (Ellis, 1990), and given the nonlinear nature of learning a lan-
guage, research is likely to “only provide us with an understanding of
individual pieces of the language learning jigsaw, not the whole
puzzle” (Nunan, 1992, p. 52). Indeed, understanding how each of
the complex parts of learning a language fit together is a tremendously
difficult undertaking given the extraordinary range of factors that play
a role in the process. One of the key problems of any kind of research
that relates to second-language acquisition is defining what SLA actu-
ally is and how to measure it (see Norris & Ortega, 2005). That is to
say, researchers need to decide what aspect or aspects of the target
language to focus on and how these will be measured in an objective
and systematic manner. At the same time, the focus of language
learning research may not be directly related to the acquisition of
language itself at all, and researchers may be identifying the underlying
66
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
factors that lead to better teaching and learning practices such as
motivation, autonomy, strategy use, cognitive processes, social rela-
tionships, and so on.
Needless to say, research involving technology has also rarely been
limited only to how it contributes to development of a second lan-
guage. In a comparative sense, early research did focus heavily on
L2 development but also included a relatively vague definition of
“motivation,” often with the ultimate goal of seeking to “prove” that
learning through technology was more effective than non-use of tech-
nology. While comparative studies do still exist – albeit to a lesser
degree – studies that look at the acquisition of certain elements of the
target language have remained a part of the research that is seen in
CALL/MALL research. Naturally, the same problems of measurement
of language development exist in studies incorporating technology.
Under strictly controlled conditions such as within a classroom situ-
ation where the parameters and variables are easier to fix, valid
methods of measurement of SLA may be possible to a certain degree
if there is sufficient replication (Porte & McManus, 2019; Weideman,
2017), but over the past several years, the use of technologies, particu-
larly mobile technologies, entails a movement into naturalistic settings
where the countless extraneous variables become extremely difficult to
control for. Of course, this does not mean that there is no place for
experimental research in MALL, but it highlights the need to realise
that learning is something that does not happen in a vacuum, rather
taking place with real students with real everyday experiences and
problems that need to be taken into account as a part of the larger
context (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of the intricacies of language
learning).
This is one of the primary reasons why research into MALL has
proven to be somewhat complex when compared with much of the
earlier research that was carried out in CALL, although these difficul-
ties are rather different from those that were encountered when
ownership of personal computers was still relatively rare. Perhaps
one of the most obvious differences is that in the early days of
CALL, learners were comparatively unfamiliar with using these tech-
nologies, and the teachers were the relative experts. The range of
resources was limited, and therefore, learners basically only had access
to what teachers provided them with. The past several years has seen
an exponential increase in the variety of materials that learners can
access on their own devices with ease – such as websites, apps, and
other resources – and decisions about what to use as supplementary
materials for learning are often made by the learners themselves with
little or no consultation with teachers. Another difficulty is associated
4.1 Introduction 67
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
with the mobile technologies themselves. By the nature of the device,
there is often an expectation that a significant proportion of learning
through mobile devices will take place out of class. While this does not
preclude using devices in classroom settings (and there have been
several very interesting studies that have looked at the use of mobile
devices in class), it is exponentially more difficult to determine how
learners are using their mobile devices in uncontrolled and unsuper-
vised settings. Teachers can get some indication of the ways in which
the learners are using the mobile devices in the classroom, but obvi-
ously, classroom uses do not necessarily translate into uses outside of
the classroom. Classroom usage is likely to be closer to teacher expect-
ations, particularly if learners know that they are being observed in
class. Moreover, when learners encounter difficulties in using tech-
nologies in the classroom, then they can quickly put up their hand and
ask the teacher or any support staff for assistance. Outside of class, on
the other hand, providing support when learners encounter difficulties
is not an easy undertaking. It can be difficult to predict the times
at which the learners will be using devices, and regardless of how
much developers may have prepared for potential problems, there
invariably will be problems that were not anticipated. Unless the scale
of technology use is large enough, such as when it is used at an
institutional level as a major component of many of the courses which
are being run (such as in a MOOC or in distance learning), support
will be provided only at limited times of the day. If a class teacher is
using technology as a part of a course that is not supported by the
institution centrally, much of the responsibility for taking care of
difficulties that may arise falls almost exclusively on the shoulders of
the teachers themselves. This has immediate implications for research,
as the degree of available support will have an impact on how learners
engage with the technology, particularly when difficulties are encoun-
tered. Support might be readily available in the classroom, but if such
support is limited and learners do not know how to deal with prob-
lems, this will very likely influence both usage and attitudes regarding
the technology.
Moreover, as learners are typically using their own devices, it is
logistically difficult to track usage. Early studies into MALL typically
involved using loaned mobile devices such as PDAs (Trinder, 2005) or
iPads (Yang & Xie, 2013), and while this was certainly investigating
mobile devices, the learning that took place was rather limited in its
mobility. In many of these studies, usage of the devices was closely
monitored, and functions were often locked to ensure that learners
remained on task. While, of course, this type of approach to research is
also necessary, its applicability to natural everyday use of mobile
68 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
devices outside the classroom is somewhat limited. In MALL, teachers
and researchers are primarily interested in what learners do with their
devices outside of the classroom, including how they make use of the
small spaces in time that they have available to them (e.g., Kukulska-
Hulme & Traxler, 2005). Needless to say, when learners are using
their own devices, it is more difficult to get an indication of what
they’re actually doing with them outside of class and, indeed, in many
cases, what they are doing with their devices inside of class too. As
described in Chapter 2, this has wider implications for classroom
management, but unless some type of tracking is available to research-
ers, they need to rely on reported data to get an indication of how
the learners use their devices when they cannot be observed directly.
The limitations associated with the types of data collection methods
will be discussed in more detail later in the chapter.
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL
The focus of research into learning through mobile devices has
changed dramatically over the years, but it has always been broad in
its focus, both looking at attitudes towards devices and examining
preferences in the ways in which they can be used. Research into
mobile learning has gone through a series of phases, starting with
the earliest research in the late 1990s that sought to see whether or
not it was possible to use mobile devices as a part of language teaching
and learning. As is the case with a number of new technologies as they
appear (see Chapter 2), much of the early research in mobile learning
focussed on the affordances of the technology in terms of what can be
achieved through mobile devices, often as a comparison with other
technologies such as the computer, with activities carried out using
non-technological means, or both. Comparative research has long
been a focus of much of the research into technology usage, where
computers were compared with textbooks or other so-called trad-
itional teaching and learning techniques. As Burston (2003) conjec-
tures, one of the primary reasons for this type of research was to prove
that the amount of time, effort, and cost that went into purchasing
expensive technologies were worthwhile, which he labelled the
“burden of proof” (p. 219). These types of comparisons have persisted
to a certain degree, despite the obvious difficulties in replicating paper-
based materials with technology and, more importantly, the problem
that simply replicating paper-based materials usually fails to take
advantage of the affordances of the technology. These kinds of con-
trasts plagued research into CALL for many years, as teachers
attempted to justify the use of technology but were gradually replaced
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL 69
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
with studies that explored appropriate pedagogies for using technol-
ogy in teaching and learning environments.
It is both surprising and anticipated that these comparisons have
resurfaced with the advent of mobile-assisted language learning – it is
surprising that it is still believed that comparisons are possible, and at
the same time, it is anticipated that teachers, researchers, and adminis-
trators feel the need to confirm how new technologies fare compared
to existing benchmarks. In saying this, some comparative studies do
give insights into learner behaviour, depending on how they are
carried out. An example is Huang and Lin’s (2011) study of mobile
reading, in which they examined learner attitudes towards reading on
computer, paper, and mobile phones. They found that learners dem-
onstrated a preference for paper over both computers and mobile
phones, and that phones were particularly inconvenient for reading
as a result of the small screen and the need to scroll through the pages.
It should be noted, however, that the study was held before smart-
phones reached the mainstream, meaning that not only were the
screens smaller than standard phones of today, but it was also neces-
sary to press and hold down keys in order to scroll through pages.
Other attempts to compare mobile devices with alternatives have also
appeared in the literature, such as Lin’s (2014) comparative study of
Taiwanese learners of English as a foreign language using desktop
computers and tablets for extensive reading. Lin’s study showed that
learners engaged more actively in extensive reading activities on the
tablets compared to desktop computers, a result which at first glance
seems to contradict the results of earlier studies. The major defining
difference with earlier studies is that the learners in Lin’s study used
tablets rather than mobile phones or PDAs, and the larger screen of the
tablets may have been easier for learners to engage in the reading
activities compared to the smaller screens of mobile phones and
PDAs. Coupled with the results of other studies, this type of research
is significant in that it shows that mobile learning is not homogenous,
and the choice of device will affect how it is used.
The combined results of the two studies described here provide
some insights into students’ perceptions of using mobile devices for a
specific function – in this case, reading – but they also shed some light
on the hidden complexities behind comparative studies. It is evident
that learners prefer larger screens when reading in the target language.
In one sense, this is already an anticipated outcome, but if the purpose
of engaging in mobile learning is to take advantage of the small spaces
in time that appear during the day, many of which are unplanned, it
would seem that expecting learners to have access to tablets with the
same frequency as their access to mobile phones would be overly
70 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
optimistic. Therefore, one might argue that the primary argument is
not whether learners prefer tablets over mobile phones for engaging in
reading but, rather, how to encourage learners to make use of the
devices that they carry with them to both learning and non-learning
locations to enable maximum opportunities before learning. In other
words, knowing whether learners will choose portability over non-
portability provides foundational information that suggests that
learners are, in principle, prepared to use their mobile devices for
learning, but the more difficult question to answer is not what
but how.
Aside from comparisons, another area of MALL where a large
amount of research continues to be conducted pertains to attitudes
towards mobile learning. This type of research has been central since
mobile learning first began to appear in the early 2000s, but twenty
years later, attitudes of learners and teachers to mobile learning
remains a popular theme. It might be anticipated that fundamental
motivation behind conducting this type of study is determining
whether or not learners and teachers are psychologically, emotionally,
and pedagogically equipped to engage in using mobile devices as a
mainstream part of their language learning and teaching, respectively.
Of course, this is not to say that these types of attitudinal studies do
not have a place in research. Understanding teachers’ and learners’
willingness (or lack thereof ) and the reasons behind these attitudes can
help researchers to seek ways of dealing with the problems that may
eventually lead to more active engagement.
It is not surprising that learner attitudes towards mobile learning
have been of interest to researchers. The almost universal ownership of
mobile devices by learners makes them an attractive tool for teaching
and learning, as they can be used in environments even where there is
minimal institutional infrastructural support for technology.
Intuitively, many teachers hold the view that learners are typically
enthusiastic about using their mobile devices for language learning,
and attitudinal surveys have shown that learners frequently hold a
positive disposition towards mobile learning, although often in the
absence of reports of actual usage (e.g., Dashti & Aldashti, 2015;
Wong, Wang, Ng & Kwan, 2015). Studies that include data examin-
ing learner engagement in learning using mobile devices, however,
have shown mixed responses with limited out-of-class usage being
reported in formal learning situations (Kim, Rueckert, Kim & Seo,
2013) unless sufficient training was provided about how to use the
apps and resources provided for them (Stockwell, 2019) or when there
was mobile-based social support from teachers and other students
(Tran, 2018). In self-directed use of mobile devices as a support for
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL 71
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
formal education, learners see their devices as a way of personalising
their learning and, to a lesser degree, accessing authentic resources and
connecting with others (Lai & Zheng, 2018). What is apparent is that
attitudes to learning through mobile devices can also be extremely
complex and are dependent on a range of factors that go beyond
familiarity and accessibility of mobile devices. Learners’ own percep-
tions of the usability of the device and their confidence in their own
abilities with the device, along with the provision of support and
training and the social and cultural context in which the device is used
will all have an impact on the way in which is viewed.
It could be assumed that one of the major reasons why researchers
have focussed on learner attitudes towards mobile learning is that they
are interested in identifying the factors affecting task engagement or,
perhaps more importantly, the reason for the lack of engagement
which has plagued many of the studies into mobile learning. While
these types of attitude studies can provide some insights into the
background causes, identifying why learners have tended to be less
enthusiastic about engaging in tasks and activities on mobile devices
than anticipated by teachers requires a more global investigation of the
context in which they are used. One example of this is provided by
Stockwell and Liu (2015), who identified quite different patterns of
engagement with online vocabulary and listening activities that
learners could choose to carry out on their mobile devices or
computers. Participants in the study were based in Japan and in
Taiwan, and the course design that was adopted in both countries
was controlled to be as similar to one another as possible. They found
that the learners in Japan were far more likely to engage in activities on
their mobile phones when compared with the learners in Taiwan, and
the Japanese learners engaged in the activities relatively consistently
across the semester, whereas the Taiwanese learners completed the
activities predominantly at a rush at the end of the semester.
There appear to be two main reasons for these differences. The first
of these relates to the tempo-spatial context raised by Lai and Zheng
(2018). In Japan, the vast majority of students commuted to university
using public transportation, mostly trains, but in Taiwan – at least in
the more rural city, where the study was conducted – almost all of the
students commuted to university using motorbikes. This difference
meant that the learners in Taiwan did not have access to a potential
learning opportunity that was available to the Japanese learners. The
results of surveys, server records of login times, and the information
provided by learners when they log in to the system, confirmed that
most learners in Japan used this commuting time as one of the major
opportunities for engaging in the online activities. The Taiwanese
72 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learners, on the other hand, were far more likely to engage in the
activities in their homes using their computers. The decision to use
their computers rather than their mobile phones to engage in the
activities is likely a result of the fact that they just didn’t have an
appropriate place where they could use their mobile phones to engage
in the activities.
The second factor that is thought to have played a large role in
learner attitudes towards the mobile-based activities is the teacher. The
way in which the teacher frames learning activities to technology-
based activities will invariably have an impact on learners’ attitudes
and readiness to engage in them (Lamb, 2017; Stockwell, 2013).
Learners in Japan were recommended to complete the activities as
they would assist them in weekly quizzes, while the learners in
Taiwan were given a grade for the number of activities they completed
before the end of the semester. This difference in the ways in which the
teacher framed the activities brought about rather different views on
the part of the learners, where the emphasis for the students in Japan
was the relationship between the activities themselves and the weekly
vocabulary quizzes, while for the students in Taiwan the focus was the
completion of activities to receive a grade. This likely resulted in the
usage patterns exhibited in the study, where the Japanese learners
engaged in the activities relatively consistently, and access logs showed
that there was a tendency for many of the learners to use their mobile
phones for the activities shortly before the quizzes. Because the ultim-
ate goal for the Taiwanese learners was the completion of activities
before the semester, the learners likely rushed to complete them imme-
diately before the deadline. This tendency also could have had a direct
influence on a selection of the platform; because the learners engaged
in the activities for extended periods of time in blocks, it was more
efficient for them to use their computers than their mobile phones.
The example provided here helps to illustrate the potential weak-
nesses of simply asking learners about their attitudes towards mobile
learning. Actual engagement appears to be far more likely a result of
contextual factors than simply a positive predisposition towards using
their mobile devices. The differences in the engagement between
Japanese learners and the Taiwanese learners described in this study
may have been less a result of attitudes towards mobile devices as
learning tools than a combination of a lack of suitable times and places
to complete the activities on mobile devices and the ways in which the
activities were framed by the teacher. Studies looking at learner atti-
tudes have their place, but it is essential to bear in mind that positive
learner attitudes are not necessarily a predictor of engagement in
mobile learning, and that attitudes are prone to change depending
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL 73
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
on contextual factors. Understanding this greater context can mean
that the meaning behind learner attitudes can be explored more com-
prehensively in order to facilitate more consistent engagement.
In addition to learner attitudes, teacher attitudes towards mobile
learning have also featured quite centrally in research over the past
several years. Studies looking at teacher attitudes to technology both
in language education and in education in general featured in the
literature as access to computers and mobile devices became more
widespread, and these have continued to appear relatively consistently
(e.g., Canals & Al-Rawashdeh, 2019; Levy, 1997; Liu, Lin & Zhang,
2017; Pelgrum, 2001; Weibe & Kabata, 2010). The main focus of
such studies has been to identify the barriers to the integration of
technology, and the majority paint a similar picture of the problems
faced by teachers: a lack of training, a lack of support, and a lack of
appropriate resources. The issue of teacher training has also been a
recurring theme in research since the mid-2000s, as the need for
appropriate training in technology has come to be more widely recog-
nised (Hubbard & Levy, 2006; Kessler, 2007; Kessler & Hubbard,
2017). This will be dealt with in more depth in Chapter 8.
Although attitudinal studies regarding learning through mobile
devices have in some ways mirrored those of broader uses of technol-
ogy in language education in terms of the problems faced by teachers,
there have been some obvious differences as well. Not the least of these
differences is that studies looking at mobile learning also deal with the
potential for distractions of mobile devices in the classroom
(Grimshaw, Cardoso & Collins, 2017). Indeed, it could be argued
that one of the reasons for the mixed views towards mobile learning
has been the fear that the device will be a distraction that could have a
negative impact on what happens both inside and outside of class.
A large proportion of teachers agree that mobile technologies can lead
to better learning but, at the same time, are concerned that learners
will be distracted from the class content if they use technology in class
(Lisenbee, 2016). The distractions of using technology in class (see
Chapter 3) are to a certain degree valid ones, but holding overly
negative views of technology usage in the classroom without consider-
ing the ways of dealing with them can lead to failing to take advantage
of a potentially powerful in-class learning tool.
Another aspect that relates to teacher attitudes towards technology
is how they evaluate their own abilities with regards to their learners
and vice versa. In a study of teacher and learner attitudes in Sweden,
Lindberg, Olofsson and Fransson (2016) confirmed that many
teachers believe that, because learners can use technology at home,
that they are also capable of using it at school. What was particularly
74 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
interesting, however, was that learners felt a gap between the abilities
of different teachers and that this may have an impact on how tech-
nology is used for education purposes. Moreover, learners commonly
did indeed use their smartphones for non-educational purposes but felt
that smartphones were not capitalised upon as much as they could be
for learning purposes. This result suggests that there may be gaps
between the perceptions of both the teachers and the learners, leading
to dissatisfaction on both sides. For this reason, research that looks
at attitudes of teachers towards learners – and learners towards
teachers – is an essential part of laying the foundation for solid
pedagogy. However, there is a need to go beyond the attitudes
towards mobile learning to explore the appropriate pedagogies utilis-
ing mobile devices to establish best practice.
There have been several meta-analyses and syntheses of MALL
research carried out over the past few years which take stock of what
has been achieved thus far. The focus of these studies has been very
broad. For example, Hwang and Wu (2014) investigated the impact of
mobile devices on learner motivation and achievement in reported
research between 2008 and 2012 and suggested that there has been
a small impact on both. Duman, Orhon and Gedik (2015) identified
research trends in MALL research and named vocabulary as over-
whelmingly the most researched language area from 2000 through to
2012, with nearly four times the amount of research than that carried
out on listening. Burston’s (2012) comprehensive sixty-nine-page
annotated bibliography of implementation studies MALL in practice
remains a benchmark in determining the nature of research conducted
with mobile devices between 1994 and 2012. Certain language skills
and areas have been the topic of meta-analysis as well. Lin and Lin
(2019), for instance, investigated the effectiveness of MALL on
English vocabulary learning through a meta-analysis on thirty-three
studies from 2005 through to 2018, concluding that mobile learning
could have a positive impact. However, some studies have been quite
critical of MALL research, such as Burston (2015), arguing that just
nineteen out of 291 research studies were designed solidly enough to
determine any potential learning outcomes from language learning
with mobile devices. The broad range of research carried out through
synthesis of previous research allows us to see the depth and breadth
of the research being conducted with mobile devices in language
teaching and learning, along with the potential shortcomings.
Other research has focussed more specifically on discreet elements
of MALL, such as language skills and areas. For example, Çakmak
and Erçetin (2018) investigated the effect of gloss type on text recall
and incidental learning of vocabulary on mobile phones, and Chen,
4.2 The Focus of Research in MALL 75
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Carger, and Smith (2017) examined the impact of mobile devices on
learners’ narrative writing. There has also been research which has
attempted to explore how the affordances of mobile devices may be
used in language teaching and learning, such as the GPS function for
location-based educational games (Holden & Sykes, 2011) or aug-
mented reality (Richardson, 2016). Finally, research that seeks to
draw relationships between mobile learning and brain function – such
as the work of Hong et al. (2017), who identified areas of the brain
that activate while using mobile-based games through MRI scans.
The examples provided here are far from exhaustive and represent
just a small part of the complex studies that have been carried out into
MALL over the past twenty years or so. The scale has varied from
small studies exploring a single language skill through to large-scale
syntheses of research carried out over tens or even hundreds of studies.
As with most research into second-language teaching and learning,
MALL research depends very heavily on sound research design, and
knowing how research has been conducted can assist potential
researchers to understand the options that are available to them in
conducting research and how to avoid some of the potential pitfalls.
From the Field: Choosing a Focus in MALL Research
Being in a position where I supervise MA and PhD students, I see many
students who are interested in MALL but struggle to find a focus. Invariably,
the starting point for most tends to be learner attitudes towards mobile
learning, where they want to see how learners feel about using mobile
devices for language learning. Attitudes towards learning are certainly
important, but they are highly dependent on underlying factors such as skills
and experience with technology and the quantity and quality of training that
they have received. As a result, I try to encourage my students to go beyond
the superficial side of attitudes and to look at these factors that contribute to
the formation of attitudes towards mobile learning. At the same time, when
students discuss “MALL,” they are rarely able to articulate what is encom-
passed in the term beyond apps, and they frequently view learning through
mobile devices as exclusively an informal, out-of-class undertaking. Choosing
a research topic is very dependent upon having a clear understanding of
what MALL is, how it is conducted, and knowing who the learners are. If the
ultimate aim of MALL research is to enhance learning with the support of
mobile devices, then research needs to be carried out that explores the
various barriers faced by teachers and learners – many of which are now
widely documented – to determine how they can be overcome to lead to
better practice.
76 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research
This section provides an overview of some of the data collection
methods that have been used in MALL research. It is largely descrip-
tive at this point, and the limitations, while touched on here, will be
dealt with in more detail in the following section. The discussion will
look at surveys, interviews, learning journals, and various forms of
tracking (server logs, app records, and so on). The features of the
various studies – including the contexts in which they were conducted,
the focus of what the studies sought to find out, and the implications
for our understanding of MALL through these collective methods –
will be discussed.
As has been alluded to earlier, MALL research has been limited to a
large degree by the means through which studies are conducted. When
mobile devices were less commonly owned by learners themselves,
devices were often provided in class sets and were frequently under
constant supervision of teachers to prevent damage and/or loss (see
Stockwell, 2016, for a discussion). This in itself meant that the
research was largely limited to supervised usage of devices where
teachers could deal with difficulties as they arose, but it also meant
that usage was not what could be termed as natural in some sense. It
should be pointed out that this type of research is not without mean-
ing, but it does mean that it is not necessarily representative of how
learners will engage with devices in naturalistic settings. This is an
issue of great importance, because it has an impact not only on task
design, but also on how and when support should be provided (e.g.,
Lai, 2016). As a result, this section will discuss the potential limita-
tions of research into the use of mobile devices for language learning,
along with some suggestions for how to deal with these difficulties.
The section will discuss issues with installing tracking software on
mobile devices that are owned by the learners themselves and describe
possible ways in which tracking can be carried out, such as logs
maintained on the server (Stockwell, 2008). It will also describe the
problems with relying on reported data, look at research into the use
of surveys (Hsu, 2013) and learning journals (Lin, 2014), and discuss
ways of overcoming the issue of seeing patterns of usage with mobile
devices outside of class. Learner usage data then will need to take the
form of data that can be recorded and stored externally or reported
data, each of which face potential limitations.
While there are several different ways of describing research
methods, the categories outlined by Nunan (1992) make a very access-
ible starting point for ease of understanding the different types of
research methods that might be applicable to MALL. The descriptions
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 77
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that follow, then, are based loosely on these categories but have been
adapted and reordered to suit the ways in which they might be used in
MALL. There are, of course, other ways of categorising these data
collection methods, but this does allow an easy overview to assist in
identifying the different options that are available to researchers, along
with examples of how they have been used in MALL research.
4.3.1 Observations
While the main focus of MALL research has been on the use of
technology outside of class, there have been several examples of
studies that investigate how mobile technologies are used in class as
well. Through such studies, researchers have primarily sought to
determine (1) how learners use the available technologies and (2)
how they interact with one other and/or the teacher. A difficulty
associated with classroom observation with mobile devices, however,
is that while it is possible to see what learners do outside of the device,
it is extremely difficult to determine what is actually being done with
the device itself. This has been a problem with learning outside of class
to a degree as well, meaning that introspective methods (see the
following subsection) will often need to be used in conjunction with
other observation methods to get a clear indication of what learners
are doing on their devices. Two of the most commonly used methods
of carrying out observation in the classroom are observation checklists
and interaction analysis. Both methods provide insights into what
learners do in class, but, of course, each has its own strengths and
limitations. Observation checklists mean that classroom behaviour
can be quantified, meaning that it is possible to determine if a behav-
iour is random or systematic, and the circumstances surrounding it can
also be examined more reliably. Interaction analysis depends on their
being interaction among learners or between the learners and the
teacher but will require there to be some means of recording this
interaction. This interaction can be audio or video recorded, or if the
interaction takes place electronically (such as chat, SNS, or email
through a mobile or other device), a digital record will most typically
remain on completion of the interactions.
Observation checklists typically involve researchers setting up in
advance a list of behaviours that they wish to check for – such as
learners referring to their devices, asking the teacher for help, talking
with others, and so forth – and tallying a record of each time that these
occur. The researcher may also choose to include further information
for when these behaviours take place – such as the individual circum-
stances, the duration, or other information that they feel is relevant to
78 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
how, when, and why the learners or teacher engaged in this behaviour.
Classroom observation regarding MALL has been unusually rare, but
there are a small number of examples that have appeared, such as
Stockwell’s (2019) observation of learners’ in-class discussions of their
out-of-class activity with their mobile phones for learning vocabulary
and Kassem’s observation of how in-service teachers used vocabulary
apps in class as a part of their teaching. In both cases, checklists made
it possible for the researcher to keep track of predetermined behav-
iours – in these examples, of both teachers and learners – to determine
why and how they engage with mobile technologies in class.
Classroom interaction analysis usually occurs through taking a
record of the interactions that take place in class and applying a
coding frame to analyse them for certain features. This can take the
form of criteria that have been decided from the outset in order to
confirm an existing theory, or it can take the form of data-driven
research, from which a working hypothesis is derived from a prelimin-
ary analysis of the data (Riazi, 2016). When data are oral, researchers
may choose to transcribe the interactions in order to make the analysis
easier to carry out, but with data from text-based communication, the
logs of communication will normally be more readily available. With
video-based data, analysis may become multimodal, where the use of
language is correlated with other observable behaviours. There have
been examples of analysis of classroom interaction involving mobile
learning. For example, Van Praag and Sanchez (2015) observed in-
service teachers to explore how they used mobile technologies as a part
of their language classes using video recordings, supported by research
notes to point out what they termed as “critical events” that were
considered as being directly relevant to their research. Regarding
student behaviour in the classroom, Wong, Chin, Tan, and Liu
(2010) examined learners’ use of an app designed for learning
Chinese idioms in class, using video recordings and field notes,
coupled with interactions of the online discussions that took place
between the students. It should be kept in mind, however, that the
problem with observations of classroom interaction is that the partici-
pants who are being observed are unlikely to engage in behaviour that
is completely natural until they have had time to get used to being
monitored. According to what Labov (1972) has termed the observer’s
paradox, although researchers wish to see natural behaviour, partici-
pants will typically not exhibit this behaviour during observation, at
least in the short term. To attain data for classroom analysis, research-
ers need to spend sufficient time in the learning environment for
learners to feel comfortable enough to revert back to their natural
behaviour (see Section 4.3.3).
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 79
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
4.3.2 Introspective Methods
As described in the previous section, understanding what learners
do with their mobile technologies can be difficult, with researchers
being limited to what they can physically observe or record. While
this can be said of in-class behaviours, tracking learner behaviour
outside of class is even more difficult, and researchers are usually
forced to rely on introspective methods to get further information
from the learners themselves about what they do with their mobile
devices for learning. Introspective methods have gained popularity
over the past several decades as researchers have argued that they
provide insights to learners’ behaviours that cannot be observed,
and often also allows them to infer learners’ reasoning behind their
behaviours (Taylor & Sobel, 2015). According to Gass and Mackey
(2009), introspection makes it possible to “observe internal pro-
cesses in much the same way as one can observe external real-world
events” (p. 1). Two commonly used introspective methods in order
to achieve this are learning diaries and retrospection. Each of these
has its own individual merits and, at the same time, also its
limitations.
Learning diaries, or learning journals or reflective journals, which
have been in use in language teaching and learning for several decades,
are “a first-person account of a language learning or teaching experi-
ence, documented through regular, candid entries in a personal jour-
nal” (Bailey, 1990, p. 215). They are, in essence, records that subjects
keep of the activities that they carry out pertaining to their learning or
teaching. Ideally, diaries are filled in on an ongoing basis, and as they
carry out an activity related to their study, they keep a record of this
activity. Learning diaries enable researchers to have insights into what
teachers and learners are doing outside of class, and they also enable
respondents to include some degree of reflection on their activity.
Having respondents reflect on their activities through learning diaries
has been associated with positive change in behaviour, in that learners
can consider their own learning practices and how to improve upon
them (Rampazzo & Aranha, 2019), but learning diaries may also
serve to alter learners’ behaviour because of the increased salience of
their activities, making it difficult to determine “natural” activity
outside of class. A specific problem with using learning diaries with
mobile learning is that unless participants have access to the diary (be
it paper-based or electronic) at all times that they can access mobile-
based activities, it is difficult to keep records consistently. In such
cases, participants will fill in the diaries later, often recording several
instances collectively. Learning diaries have been used in research into
80 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
mobile-assisted language learning in both formal and informal learn-
ing contexts. Stockwell (2007), for example, used learning journals to
investigate when and where learners engaged in mobile-based vocabu-
lary activities as a support for their classes, while Chen (2013) asked
learners to keep a record of how they used tablets outside of class. For
informal learning, Benson, Chappell and Yates (2018) asked a student
who had arrived recently in Australia to keep track of her learning
experiences (including those on mobile devices) using an electronic
diary.
Retrospection, also known as stimulated recall, also has a long
history in SLA research, with examples seen in the literature from as
early as the 1950s (e.g., Bloom, 1954). It consists of providing subjects
with some prompt or reminder of an event and asking them to recall
the mental processes that took place at that time. Participants are able
to think about certain behaviours that they engaged in during a task or
other activity and to verbalise these. According to Bloom (1954), if
there are sufficient stimuli to remind the participants about their
behaviour, they are able to vividly and accurately recall the events
that took place. It is this accuracy, however, which is the downside of
stimulated recall (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977, cited in Nunan, 1992), and
the gap between the event and the recall task can make the data
unreliable. One of the most common tools used to stimulate partici-
pants’ recollection of events in general education has been video (Gass
& Mackey, 2009), but the use of video to observe mobile learning has
limited value, particularly if the goal is to keep a record of what
individual learners are doing on their devices. Depending on the goals
of the research, taking video recordings is possible during class time,
but this is not an option to researchers outside of class, unless there is
software installed on learners’ mobile devices which enables research-
ers to record learner activity on their devices (see the following point
on ethnographic methods). There have been studies using stimulated
recall in mobile learning, and these have been carried on both teachers
and learners. Van Praag and Sanchez (2015), for example, identified
teachers’ behaviour and attitudes towards the use of mobile devices in
their language learning classes. Classes were video recorded, and
teachers were asked to comment on their activity in class and how
they responded to the ways in which learners used their mobile devices
in the classroom. Records of online video interaction between partici-
pants has also been used as a means of retrospection. Lee, Hampel,
and Kukulska-Hulme (2019) asked learners of English to reflect on
their use of gesture in video-conference-based discussions and to ver-
balise the reasons behind the different gestures that they used during
their communication.
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 81
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
4.3.3 Ethnographic Methods
Ethnographic research is typically more longitudinal than other types
of observational research (Polio & Friedman, 2017) and generally
involves the researcher getting into the everyday lifestyle of the sub-
jects to examine their practices. It is often associated with examining
the social aspects of language learning and usage and can take multiple
forms such as observation, surveys, questionnaires, and introspective
methods. With regards to mobile learning, however, studies using
longitudinal ethnographic methods have been relatively sparse. One
such study is by Palalas and Hoven (2013), who investigated learners,
teachers, and administrators over a seven-month period to understand
how mobile devices were used for language learning in the broader
environment. They utilised multiple methods of collecting data as a
part of their study, including interviews, focus groups, surveys,
researcher observations and reflections, email data, and a project site
called Wiggio. Another example of such a longitudinal study was by
Tay (2016), who explored the ways in iPads were used by learners
over a three-year period. The data collection methods used semi-
structured interviews, online surveys, classroom observation, and
end-of-semester examination scores, the results of which concluded
that learners who actively used their iPads as a part of their learning
more actively engaged and collaborated, and outperformed their peers
who did not.
Given the difficulties in being able to observe natural behaviour with
mobile devices for learning outside of class, researchers may also use
the virtual footprint left behind by learners from the resources that
they access. Learning management systems such as Moodle allow for
tracking methods such as access records, which can give researchers
access to information about how learners behave in a non-intrusive
manner. Stockwell (2010) for example, was able to track the usage of
learners over three four-month periods to examine when learners
accessed vocabulary and listening activities from either their mobile
devices or PCs, finding a discrepancy between post-questionnaire data
and actual usage logs. The problem with such a method is, however,
that only records of usage within the site are recorded, and if learners
download resources to their devices and then use them offline, there is
no way for researchers to keep track of this. One form of ethnographic
research, the case study, allows researchers to look into the lives of a
small number of learners in naturalistic settings, but it has been
criticised for its lack of generalisability, which may lead to theory
building. Despite this limitation, case studies do have some promising
aspects that can make them invaluable in gaining insights into the
82 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
multifaceted learning that learners may engage in (see Chapter 9).
Ethnographic research into mobile learning remains one of the areas
where research is still extremely necessary in order to see how learners
use their devices naturally, and then to build pedagogies around these
behaviours.
4.3.4 Elicitation Techniques
Nunan (1992) includes four types of data collection methods in his
description of elicitation techniques; production tasks, surveys, ques-
tionnaires, and interviews. With the exception of production tasks,
these elicitation techniques are extremely prevalent in MALL research.
While tasks have featured heavily in the literature in recent years with
some variation in definition (e.g., Ellis, 2003, 2012; Nunan, 1989), in
the context here, Nunan (1992) is referring to tasks to encourage
learners to produce naturalistic language to identify specific language
forms, either to determine their degree of competence in the form or
to examine the ways in which particular forms are used in natural
language.
Through technology, it follows that computer-mediated communi-
cation (CMC) would be the most logical choice through which to
facilitate communication to elicit production task data, and there have
been some examples of this over time with mobile devices. One
example is from Kiernan and Aizawa (2004), who used the SMS
function of their students’ phones to complete information-gap activ-
ities task face to face, on PC email, and on mobile phone SMS to
examine the differences in the language used the learners in each of the
three modes. Perhaps unsurprisingly, they found that learners pro-
duced the most language in the face-to-face interactions and the least
using mobile phones. A more recent example is a study by Li (2018),
who requested advanced learners of Chinese to engage with Chinese
native speakers through WeChat, an online messenger program used
widely in China, and examined the type of language that is produced
during the interactions by learners of Chinese language. Examples of
both formal and casual language styles were evident in the data, along
with wide of use memes and stickers. While this is in some ways closer
to ethnographic enquiry (see Section 4.3.4), depending on the tasks
that the learners are required to engage in, it is feasible that focus can
encourage production of certain language forms in order for the extent
to which they have been acquired to be examined.
Surveys, the second elicitation technique, are used to determine the
state of things as they are and require/expect no intervention on the
part of the researcher in altering the respondents’ environment.
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 83
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Surveys are used quite extensively in the social sciences – such as
psychology, sociology, and economics – and the collection of data is
typically carried out through a combination of questionnaires and
interviews, both of which are described in more detail in what follows.
Surveys have also featured in education research, including investi-
gations of how technologies are perceived or used within given con-
texts. Pelgrum (2001), for example, sought to identify obstacles to
technology integration faced by teachers in schools. He carried out a
comprehensive study of schools in twenty-six countries, finding that
while there were both commonalities and differences across inter-
national borders, lack of access to technologies, lack of teacher skills,
and difficulties in integrating technologies into instruction were the
most significant problems faced by teachers. More specifically, there
have also been studies investigating mobile learning in general in
higher education. For example, Al-Emran, Elsherif, and Shaalan
(2016) examined student and instructor attitudes to mobile learning
in Oman and UAE and found that teachers generally held positive
views towards using mobile learning and that more than 80 percent of
learners were using their mobile devices as a part of their university
study. Surveys have also been used widely to examine technology in
language education. For instance, a study by Kessler (2007) investi-
gated how graduates of a TESOL program view CALL and learn the
skills that they need to integrate technologies in teaching, finding that
most gain their knowledge of CALL through informal sources or from
personal experience, and that this experience has a greater positive
influence on their attitudes towards CALL than formal preparation in
their teacher training. With regards to MALL, Hsu (2013) looked at
EFL learners in different countries to identify their perceptions
towards mobile learning, revealing that general sentiments towards
mobile learning were positive, despite some cultural differences.
Bradley, Lindström and Hashemi (2017) investigated the ways in
which newly arrived Arabic speakers used their mobile devices to help
them to integrate into society around Sweden, and Steel and Levy
(2013) examined how learners in Australia used their mobile devices
in and out of the classroom as a part of their language studies. The key
point of each of these studies is that the researcher is investigating the
state of things as they already are and has not intervened in the
environment as to cause any change attitude or required respondents
to use technology in any way that may have an impact on the ways
that they view and use it.
Questionnaires can be used to identify three different types of data:
factual questions aim to find out background information about
respondents; behavioural questions ask about what respondents have
84 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
done or they are doing; and attitudinal questions seek to find out what
respondents are thinking and investigate their opinions, values, beliefs,
and interests (Coombe & Davidson, 2015; Dörnyei, 2003). All three
of these types of data collection methods are apparent in MALL
research as well. Factual questions may seek information about
learners’ background or experience with MALL, behavioural ques-
tions may try to find out how learners have used or are using MALL
and/or MALL activities either generally or as a part of some treatment
required by the researcher, and attitudinal questions may investigate
how learners feel about using MALL. There would be very few studies
that would not include questionnaires as at least one of the data
collection methods in MALL studies, and they are often used to find
out further information about what has been collected through other
methods. For example, Stockwell (2008) found that learners of
English expressed a desire to use their mobile phones as a supplement
to the listening activities that were used in class, but server records
revealed that the vast majority of learners elected to use their
computers rather than their mobile phones in order to do the activities.
The questionnaires that were administered at the end of the semester
could shed some light into the learners’ reasons for doing this,
revealing that apart from the physical limitations of the device, there
were several environmental factors (distractions while studying while
in transit, a need to use their computer for other subjects so they
continued using the computer for the vocabulary activities as well,
etc.) that were possible to determine just from the server log data.
The question formats that may be used in questionnaires will be
either closed (i.e., fixed responses such as true or false, selecting a
number from a Likert scale, or choosing from a set of options) or open
(i.e., where the respondents can answer freely in their own words).
Both formats have advantages and disadvantages. Closed questions
are easier to answer and to quantify but are typically formulated from
anticipated responses by the researcher (Fife-Schaw, 2006), which
means that the information that can be yielded from them is limited
and insensitive to responses that were not expected. Open questions
provide the opportunity for more information, consisting of responses
that may be as short as a single word, but longer responses may
include sentences or even paragraphs. While questionnaires are an
easy way to elicit information from participants, they are not without
limitations. Respondents are likely to respond differently depending
on whether the questionnaires are anonymous or not, and surveys that
allow the respondent to be identified may lead them to provide more
positive responses, particularly when there are potential (actual or
perceived) repercussions for negative responses.
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 85
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Another problem with questionnaires is that unless the respondents
are particularly engaged in the issues being raised in the question-
naires, it is very easy for questions to be left blank or filled in rather
briefly, and response rates to surveys are generally quite low, particu-
larly if they are offered online or in some environment where respond-
ents may opt out of responding. The validity of questionnaires is also a
point that researchers need to be aware of, as the intended meaning
behind a question may not be clear to respondents, particularly if the
survey is administered in a second language, where nuances may not
be as clear to the respondents as hoped, or if the survey has been
translated into different languages, where slightly different connota-
tions may be attached to questions than intended. Hui and Triandis
(1989) talk of what they refer to as “acquiescence bias” where
respondents from some cultures may tend to respond more positively
than their actual attitudes, possibly with the intention of saving the
face of the researcher. While, of course, care needs to be taken in
the design of questionnaires, there is also a need to ensure that they are
analysed appropriately. This includes ensuring that small samples are
not overgeneralised and that the outcomes from surveys are not inter-
preted too positively or negatively. Finally, rather than taking random
snippets of responses from open questions to illustrate a point, it is
necessary to ensure that such responses are indeed representative of
the sample, which can be confirmed with content analysis to quantify
frequencies of responses to see how much comments reflect the per-
spectives of the group. A response may seem to researchers to occur
more frequently than it really does if it is particularly salient to the to
them, and only through a systematic analysis of open responses is it
possible to ensure that samples are not being used in a way that
misrepresents the sentiments of the sample.
In order to dig even further into the learners’ attitudes or percep-
tions, interviews can make it possible to clarify responses in surveys,
which are often rather brief in the responses that can obtained, even
if the surveys themselves are relatively extensive. Through asking
the learners directly in either one-on-one or small-group interviews,
it is possible to find out more about learners’ perspectives, which
may be used to change practice or lead to further research
questions.
4.3.5 Experimental Methods
While this may be said of other methods to a certain extent, one of the
primary goals of experimental research is to build or confirm a theory,
86 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
where data are collected in order to confirm some predefined hypoth-
esis regarding the language learning process.
As described previously, experimental methods are difficult to
implement in MALL, given the fact that much of what happens
through mobile devices takes place in the small chunks in between
various other daily tasks – such as getting on the right train, ordering a
caffè latte, or finding a seat in a cafeteria – that are likely to impact on
the learner’s frame of mind when the start to engage in the activities.
Extraneous factors such listening to announcements to ensure disem-
barkation from the train at the right station, the arrival of said caffè
latte, and bumping into friends while in the cafeteria are all likely to
have an impact on the learning process, making generalisations that
could be translated into effects of the technology difficult. Experiments
are dependent upon the controlling of external factors as much as
possible, but this becomes logistically difficult to do when learners are
integrating mobile learning into various aspects of their lives.
Given that experimental research is often a form of comparative
method study, another problem raised by Ellis (2012) is also relevant,
where he describes the problems of comparing “methods” at both
global and local levels. As alluded to earlier (see Chapter 1), CALL
and MALL were often seen as being homogeneous, as is reflected in
expressions such as “CALL/MALL method” that still seems to appear
in the literature from time to time. This type of nomenclature has
parallels with the “global” comparative method, where one “method”
is compared with another, such as Audio-lingualism against (De)
Suggestopedia. Apart from the fact that, to my knowledge, there is
no such thing as a particular “CALL/MALL method,” it still has
problems in that it makes claims about teachers being required to
teach in a particular prescribed way, following the principles and
techniques that are laid out for them. Quite obviously, there is no
prescribed way of integrating technologies – mobile or otherwise –
into a learning environment, and comparing “CALL/MALL methods”
with “non-CALL/MALL methods” requires a definition of a standard-
ised teaching approach that does not exist. At a local level, the vari-
ation that can arise becomes even more apparent, and this is of more
relevance to what is seen in recent research into the use of mobile
devices.
One point that needs to be iterated here is that any research that
involves human subjects needs to take into consideration the ethical
concerns that it entails (Israel & Hay, 2006). When research involves
learners using their own devices in their own time, then these concerns
become even more pertinent, and care needs to be taken to ensure that
4.3 Data Collection Methods in MALL Research 87
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
personal information pertaining to learners and their habits is kept
securely and not used in a way that could possibly disadvantage them.
As Traxler and Vosloo (2014) point out, however, although informed
consent is the “ethical gold standard” (p. 24) when it comes to
research regarding people, the interaction and exchange of informa-
tion through mobile devices comes more fluid and abstract, meaning
that the boundaries are not as clear cut as they once were. It then
becomes the responsibility of the researcher to ensure that all measures
are put in place to protect their subjects, even though this may be as
much of a challenge as collecting the data itself in many regards.
4.4 Summary
As the discussion in this chapter shows, research into mobile learning
is extremely complex and broad in focus. The path which MALL
research has followed has resembled that of CALL in many regards,
particularly with respect to comparisons with other methods.
Comparisons in themselves need not be to show that mobile learning
is superior to methods that have come beforehand, and indeed this
type of research could even be considered as being counterproductive.
What is of more relevance with regards to research into MALL is to
identify what leads learners to more active and meaningful engage-
ment, and how this knowledge can be applied to the development of
appropriate pedagogies.
The range of research methods that are available to researchers is
also broad, encompassing that which is directly observable and those
behaviours that occur away from the eyes of researchers that require
more innovative ways of investigating. Indeed, as has been mentioned
at several points throughout this book, given that one of the primary
aims of mobile learning has been to take advantage of small snippets
of time and to weave learning into the everyday lives of learners,
understanding what happens in the broader learning context should
remain one of the prime foci of MALL research. Using an appropriate
mix of methods can provide researchers with the insights that are
needed in order to achieve this.
4.5 Discussion Questions
1. What do you think the most important consideration is when
deciding on a method for your own research? Do you think that
this can impact on how your research is conducted?
88 Research Considerations in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
2. How can you avoid problems with your research that could impact
on your timeline (i.e., could delay that completion of your
research)? What steps could or should be taken at the outset of
your research?
3. What specific issues do you think need further research with
regards to language learning through mobile devices? Find one
article published within the last two years and see if there are any
outstanding questions remaining at the end of the study.
4.5 Discussion Questions 89
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
5 Theory in MALL
5.1 Introduction
As described in Chapter 2, theory underlies virtually all aspects of
teaching and learning, including the choice of content, design of
materials, teaching approaches, interactions between teachers and
learners, assessment, and even evaluation. Language teaching – with
or without technology – is a very practical undertaking, and theory is
often sought as a means of validating both research and practice (Levy
& Stockwell, 2006). Although language teaching fits into a wide range
of disciplines, it is widely associated with applied linguistics. Applied
linguistics is not limited to language teaching and learning (Simpson,
2011), but as Davies and Elder (2004, p. 1) remind us, one of the
central questions of the field is, “How can we teach languages better?”
Li (2018) rather pointedly argues, however, that applied linguistics has
suffered branding as largely atheoretical, largely due to its practice-
oriented nature. This branding does the field little justice, given that it
has not only borrowed concepts, methods, and theories from other
disciplines, but it has also been developing and refining its own theor-
ies, which have formed the foundation of research and practice for
decades. It would be anticipated that most language teachers would
have at least some basic training in theory relevant to their teaching
needs, and knowledge of language acquisition theories is a fundamen-
tal element of the ACTFL Program Standards for the Preparation of
Language Teachers (ACTFL, 2013).
CALL has been similarly labelled as lacking in theoretical
grounding, which may be expected given that studies have revealed
it is not uncommon for research in the CALL literature to fail to
provide any explicit information about theory (Hubbard, 2009).
However, a lack of reference to a formalised theory does not necessar-
ily mean that there was no theory present, but that its contribution
may have been too tacit to warrant mention by the designers,
90
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
regardless of the role it may have played in the design of the research
or teaching environment. Perhaps not surprisingly, the view of theory
in MALL has resembled that of CALL, with theory taking on an
important but sometimes less visible position in published research.
According to Duman, Orhon and Gedik (2015), theory was men-
tioned in around two-thirds of the studies in their sample of MALL
research from 2000 to 2012, and around half of the studies included
theories related to learning. The remaining studies that included the-
ories were concerned with the attitudes towards technology or with
the design of the interface, indicating multiple purposes for the inclu-
sion of theory in research on technology in language teaching (see
Levy & Stockwell, 2006, also described later in this chapter).
These issues are explored in the following sections, including the
concept of theory, formal and informal theories, and theories associ-
ated with language teaching and learning with technology. Theories
which may be applied to MALL are also described here, including
theories for formal learning, theories of technology, theories associ-
ated with the complexity of the learning environment, theories of
motivation, and social models of language learning. The range of
theories that are presented here are certainly not meant to be exhaust-
ive but are presented as examples that may be relevant when consider-
ing the use of mobile devices in language teaching and learning.
5.2 Informal and Formal Theories
The practical nature of language teaching and learning can often mask
the vast range of underlying complexities involved. When entering
their educational environment, teachers bring with them views of what
language is, views of what elements need to be taught, views of how
languages are learned, and views of the role of the teacher in facilitat-
ing learning, all of which culminate into what happens in (and out) of
the classroom. As stated before, it is highly unlikely that teachers
would be entering their classrooms without any kind of theory about
what language is and how it is learned. Rather, it is possible that they
simply may not be using a formal theory, basing their research and
practice on informal theories (Breakwell & Rose, 2006), also referred
to as implicit theories or mindsets (Ryan & Mercer, 2012). These
informal theories may be an intuition or a “gut feeling” on which
teachers base their views and practices, and most educators bring some
kind of informal theory into their learning contexts. The theories
educators use might be independent of formal theories for a variety
of reasons. It may be that they lack the training to know what relevant
theories exist, but it is more likely that they may be consciously
5.2 Formal and Informal Theories 91
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
interpreting multiple theories from different perspectives, adding new
elements that have not been included in existing formal theories based
on their own experiences and intuitions.
Starting with an intuition or hypothesis and further developing this
into a theory is a natural part of progression of theory development.
Van Ryn and Heaney (1992, p. 217) suggest that “most social and
behavioural science theories are rooted in the same fertile ground that
engenders most of human creative endeavours: common everyday
experience.” It is the instincts that are held by many teachers that
form the starting point for many of the accepted theories that we see in
language teaching, and to this end, they are an essential part of
research and practice. Since informal theories are not bound to more
formalised or established theories, they can provide the foundation for
deeper insights into the learning process than might be gained through
over-reliance on existing models (Sixsmith & Simco, 1997). The larg-
est problem with informal theories, however, is that they are often
applicable to a single narrowly defined context with outcomes that
have yet to be confirmed by sufficient data in varied contexts to
eventually lead to building a formal theory.
Formal theories are developed over time and provide a rational
explanation for a given phenomenon based on incremental empir-
ical evidence (Hanson, 1995). As more evidence is collected through
carrying out replicative studies, it becomes possible to build theories
that can be applied to wider contexts. Theory building is an import-
ant part of deepening our understanding of phenomena, because it
“provides a framework for analysis, facilitates the efficient develop-
ment of the field, and is needed for the applicability to practical
real-world problems” (Wacker, 1998, p. 361). Theories are, how-
ever, typically based on assumptions from which new ideas are
derived and tested, and the biggest limitation with theory building
is that it is tied to its fundamental assumptions, regardless of how
complex the theory may become (Hanson, 1995). In other words, it
is very easy to fall into the trap of making claims based on theories
and accepting them as fact, but it is essential to remember that the
very nature of theories means that they are interpretations of phe-
nomena, and these interpretations may vary greatly depending on
the underlying assumptions from which they derive. Obviously, a
single study is unlikely to lead to any significant development in
theory; rather, studies need to systematically build on previous
work to test the robustness of hypotheses until they reach a point
that they become accepted as a valid theory. The applicability of
theory to research and practice is described in more depth in
what follows.
92 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
5.3 Fundamentals of Theory
In general, views towards theory in education have polarised
towards more positive or negative perspectives. On the one hand,
there are those who argue that practice simply cannot exist without
theory, even if these theories are not explicitly stated or even fully
formulated, while on the other hand, there is the view that focussing
too much on a specific theory or theories can make it possible to
have a biased or skewed perspective of the environment, the data,
and subsequent conclusions. Advocates of the importance of the
role of theory in research and practice would likely agree with
Breakwell and Rose, who argue that “knowledge is said to be
power, and knowledge is stored elegantly and systematically in the
form of theory. Consequently, good theory is both powerful and of
practical relevance” (2006, p. 2). This claim includes some funda-
mental points that underlie the functions that theory may take on.
Theory provides us with the central concepts and assumptions that
are necessary to carry out research, without which it would be very
difficult to make sense of data (Neuman, 2003). Thus, without some
form of theory, not only would understanding data be a challenge,
but researchers would have little idea of what to investigate and for
what reasons. From this perspective, the argument of theory as
being of integral importance in terms of the knowledge that is held
within it and its relevance to carrying out practice and/or research
becomes apparent.
Because formal theories have been confirmed with empirical data
collected from varied contexts, most people would agree that formal
theories tend to have greater face validity than informal ones. As
theories become more widely disseminated, they can be either further
confirmed or disconfirmed through systematic research studies. This
enables a theory to evolve over time and to ultimately be shaped into
something which can account for and predict potential outcomes.
Wacker (1998) describes formal theories as having four basic elem-
ents, these being (1) conceptual definitions, (2) domain limitations, (3)
relationship building, and (4) predictions. Conceptual definitions lay
the foundations for the theory in terms of the meaning and applicabil-
ity of the terminology that is used in describing the theory. If we
imagine we are formulating a theory of social interaction, for example,
we will need to define what is meant by both “social” and “inter-
action” in the context they are used within the theoretical framework.
Domain limitations restrict the scope of the theory to enable it to be
applied to a given situation, such as who the participants within an
interaction might be and the nature of the interactions. Relationship
5.3 Fundamentals of Theory 93
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
building examines the ways in which the theory can build upon
existing theories and allows for links to be drawn between them to
collectively provide insights into the phenomena from a broader per-
spective. Finally, according to Wacker’s (1998) definition, theories
should allow for predictions to be made regarding the concepts that
have been defined as a part of that theory. In other words, based on
our hypothetical theory of social interaction, we should be able to
make predictions regarding the outcomes that would be achieved
through social interaction, and these predictions would, for the most
part, hold true within the given domain. It is this predictive element
that some argue is one of the most important outcomes of theory. The
contribution of theory to understand why things happen can be used
to improve future practice through enabling necessary intervention to
bring about desired results (Breakwell & Rose, 2006), and this is one
of the attractions of having a solid theory on which to base research
and practice.
In contrast, however, theories have been criticised for failing to
explain the complexities of the fields to which they are applied. They
can oversimplify the interrelationships between the elements and how
these elements interplay with one another to result in the given
outcomes, and it is difficult for a single theory to sufficiently account
for complex phenomena (e.g., Burns & deVillé, 2007). This perspec-
tive does not condemn theory per se, but, rather, it illustrates a need
to understand that one theory is unlikely to be able to incorporate all
competing factors that may be at work on many different scales of
time and space (e.g., Mitchell, 2009; Sawyer, 2005). A concept which
has gained ground that seeks to address this issue is complex systems
theory, also known as dynamic systems theory, which explores the
apparently random relationship between the interplay of factors,
where an outcome does not necessarily correlate to the sum of the
components. In a complex system, a seemingly insignificant change in
one component can have unseen and unexpected impacts on other
components. Examples of archetypal complex systems are global
climate, economies, and immune systems (Mitchell & Newman,
2002), which are an intricate interplay of components where the
outcomes are extremely difficult to predict despite understanding
the workings of the individual components. While complex systems
viewpoints have the potential to bring about a dramatic change in the
way in which systems are conceptualised and unify cognitive theories
and pedagogical research (Wilensky & Jacobson, 2014), they are still
relatively new to educational circles and very much away from the
mainstream.
94 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
From the Field: Using Theory in Research
Teaching in postgraduate programs, I find that my students are often at a loss
as to how to apply theory to their research when writing their dissertations.
There largely appear to be two patterns that I see students falling into when
seeking theory. The first is that students already have their research plan in
mind but have not looked at relevant theories until their study is conceptual-
ised. This often results in students looking for theories that suit what it is that
they already have in mind for their research, and they often select theories
based on the compatibility with their predicted results. The second pattern is
that students have read theories and find one that they feel is particularly
appealing, and this forms the foundation of their research design. While there
may be arguments on both sides, it is difficult to say that either one of these
methods is particularly good or bad. Looking for theories that match the data
that students are working with can allow them to work from the data and then
look for theories that might explain their results, but at the same time, it may
lead them to dismiss theories that could be very relevant. Similarly, working
from established theories can provide a solid foundation for the work that they
are doing, but at the same time can focus their view on one aspect of the data
that might cause them not to see other outcomes. The key point is that
students need to be aware of the fact that theory can indeed shape how data
are collected and analysed, and bearing this in mind from the outset can allow
them to have a balanced view of their own research contexts.
5.4 Theory in CALL
It is well known that theories associated with language teaching and
learning have traditionally followed trends in psychology, originating
mostly from behaviourist theories and shifting to the cognitive and
social theories that still form the basis for much of our understanding
of the language learning process today (see Mitchell, Myles &
Marsden, 2013). Theories undergo trends and fashions, and there
has been ongoing evolution of these theories over the past century
reflected in the differences in teaching approaches that have come and
gone, particularly evident in the methods era (see Richards & Rodgers,
2014). Despite the decades of change, a question that has been at the
root of language teaching and learning has been, “What must a theory
of language learning seek to explain?” A straightforward answer to
this question has proven to be surprisingly elusive, and views on the
strengths and weaknesses of the various theories that have been pos-
tulated over the years have continued to be quite strongly divided.
5.4 Theory in CALL 95
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
One of the main problems is that different theories explain different
parts of the language learning process, and these theories are essen-
tially looking at an enormously sophisticated phenomenon from the
different perspectives that represent an area of particular interest to the
researcher. For decades, there have been theories that have addressed
the need for input, such as Krashen’s comprehensible input theory
(Krashen, 1981), and others that stressed the need for interaction that
required both input and output, such as Long’s interaction hypothesis
(Long, 1983) and Swain’s comprehensible output theory (Swain,
1985, 1995). Other theories have placed more emphasis on the con-
text in which learning takes place such as sociocultural theory (Lantolf
& Thorne, 2006), or on consciousness and awareness in learning as in
the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1999, 2009), and still others on the
construction of knowledge inside the minds of the learners as in
constructivism (Kaufman, 2004). Theories have also attempted to
explain the motivation of learners to engage in language learning such
as self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 2009) and the ideal self
(Dörnyei, 2001; Dörnyei & Ushioda, 2011). Attempts to bring
together various competing models are seen periodically, such as
Robinson’s (1995) discussion of attention, memory, and noticing,
which brings together related theories to show how they complement
or contrast one another, but these discussions still struggle to bring
together the wide range of theories that exist to describe the teaching
and learning process in all its dimensions.
Theories have been broad in their collective focus and have endeav-
oured to account for the various intricacies of the language learning
process, but learning outcomes are “multifinal,” meaning that essen-
tially the same stimuli lead to different conclusions (Hanson, 1995).
As has been seen in other disciplines, there have been efforts to
account for the inability of theory in applied linguistics to account
for the nonlinear nature of learning with a complex systems theory
perspective (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008), and this has gained
a good deal of support over the past decade. There would be very few
who would refute any of the aforementioned theories in terms of how
they can account for at least some part of what learning a language
means, but at the same time, none of them would be able to paint a
complete picture of the process. What becomes clear from this discus-
sion is that theory most certainly does feature heavily in applied
linguistics, which has consisted of adopting, adapting, formulating,
and reformulating theories in order to understand and enhance the
language learning process. To this end, to return to our question from
the beginning of this section, we could argue that a theory of language
learning needs to explain part of the entire picture, to shed light on our
96 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
understanding of at least one aspect of the intersecting aspects
involved, but this part also needs to fit together with other theories
in the larger ecology of language learning.
Considering the criticism that applied linguistics faced regarding a
lack in theoretical rigor from other fields (Li, 2018), it is somehow
ironic that CALL has received similar treatment from many applied
linguists (Coleman, 2005). The field is sometimes seen as being com-
prised of a group of tinkerers with technology who can provide lists of
software, websites, and apps for language learning based on unsub-
stantiated and often anecdotal evidence. This is likely the result of the
strong technocentric focus of CALL over the years, with the majority
of studies in CALL using technology – typically new technologies – as
the point of departure for their research (Stockwell, 2012a). Theory
has, of course, featured in CALL research, and indeed there has been
great variety in the range of theories that have been applied and the
rationales for their use. While theory played a lesser role in early
discussions of the use of technology in language teaching and learning,
research since the 2000s has not only included theories from applied
linguistics but has also expanded to include psychology, learning
theories, sociology, human–computer interaction, instructional
design, and information systems (see Hubbard, 2009, for a discus-
sion). Over the past several years, there have been a few attempts to
take stock of theory in CALL (e.g., Hubbard, 2009; Hubbard & Levy,
2016; Levy & Stockwell, 2006; Stockwell, 2014), and these have
highlighted the complexity of theories involved in the inherently inter-
disciplinary nature of CALL.
Theory has had a wide-ranging impact on the way in which CALL is
viewed with respect to other fields, in particular SLA, and how to
consolidate SLA theory and CALL has been discussed since the early
days of CALL (see Doughty, 1987). CALL is seen as having obvious
relationships with SLA, but it maintains enough elements of its own to
deserve separate consideration in some capacity, particularly with
regards to the role of the technology (Stockwell, 2012b). Since
CALL is at the intersection of two major fields – language learning
and technology – each of which representing an enormous body of
research, theory needs to consider both of these larger fields to account
for the impact that each one has on the other. Hubbard and Levy
(2016, citing Hubbard, 2009) define CALL theory as representing the
“set of perspectives, theoretical models, frameworks and specific the-
ories that offer generalisations to account for phenomena related to
the use of digital technology in the pursuit of language learning
objectives; ground and sustain relevant research agendas; [and] inform
effective CALL design and teaching practice” (p. 25). The perspective
5.4 Theory in CALL 97
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
presented here is very much in agreement with Levy and Stockwell
(2006), who propose that theory may be used for design of CALL, for
teaching with CALL, and/or for researching with CALL. Design may
refer to the development of a new tool – or artefact – such as a
program, a website, or an app, but it may also refer to the creation
of a learning environment that uses these artefacts. Theories selected
for design may relate to second-language learning but also to instruc-
tional design, which is often embedded within the design of these
artefacts. Teaching will typically rely mostly on theories associated
with language learning, but other theories associated with psychology,
sociology, or cognition may well be relevant to the methods and
approaches that teachers adopt. Finally, research will often involve
theory testing, which – as stated before – is a necessary step for
validating theory. It is feasible, of course, that the theories selected
for design, teaching, and research are compatible, but it is also possible
for there to be conflicting views that need to be consolidated in
carrying out teaching or research that involves technology.
Based on the interdisciplinary nature of CALL, Levy and Stockwell
(2006) suggest that CALL practitioners often draw on multiple theor-
ies – theoretical pluralism – which may be necessary to gain the
greatest insights into the complex interplay of concurrent processes
(see Mitchell, Myles & Marsden, 2013). As Hubbard and Levy (2016)
point out, to date, there have yet to be any native theories that have
been born from the CALL field itself, but rather, CALL practitioners
have borrowed, instantiated, adapted, combined, synthesised, con-
structed, or refined other theories and applied them skilfully to both
research and practice. Building on Kramch’s (2002) ecological per-
spective of language acquisition and language socialisation, Blin
(2016) proposes that technology in language teaching and learning
forms a CALL ecosystem, which she defines as consisting of “interact-
ing components including language learners, teachers and other users
of the target language, technological devices, applications and plat-
forms, and multimodal material/semiotic artefacts and resources, all of
which participate in a language learning/use activity, as well as the
social processes and semiotic practices that characterise the way that
human actors interact with one another and with other components of
the system” (p. 39). Not surprisingly, and Blin herself makes this
connection too, but the relationship with a complexity theory perspec-
tive is immediately obvious. Technology comprises one component
of the entire whole, and its potential to have an impact on other
components within the whole system – sometimes unpredictably – is
reminiscent of the nature of a complex system and helps to explain the
existence of multiple complementary and competing theories in CALL.
98 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A MALL ecosystem can become even more multifaceted when con-
sidering that learning with mobile devices entails a range of additional
environmental factors, particularly if this learning takes place in vary-
ing contexts that fit Traxler’s (2007) gaps in time and space, as
described in the following section.
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL
It is to be expected that there is quite some overlap in the theories
applied to MALL when compared to those used in CALL. Durman,
Orhon and Gedik (2015) in their overview of MALL research from
2000 to 2012 found similarities with CALL in the theories related to
language learning – namely constructivism, social constructivism, and
sociocultural theory, collaborative learning, and task-based learning.
Other theories were more closely associated with the design of tasks
using mobile technologies, such as ubiquitous learning, situated
learning theory, dual-coding theory, cognitive theory of multimedia
learning, cognitive load, multimedia design principles, and learning
memory cycles. Theories related to attitudes towards mobile technolo-
gies were also evident in the studies in their sample, namely the
technology acceptance model (TAM) and the unified theory of accept-
ance and use of technology (UTAUT). It is interesting to note here that
the categories of theory for design, teaching, and practice proposed by
Levy and Stockwell (2006) were also clearly evident in MALL studies,
providing support for there being similar processes at work when
implementing mobile devices in language teaching and research as
has been seen more broadly in CALL.
While there are several necessary commonalities between CALL and
MALL, to determine which theories are likely to be more applicable to
MALL, it is important to note the differences between learning
through more “traditional” fixed or portable (as opposed to mobile)
technologies such as desktop and laptop computers and mobile
devices such as mobile phones and tablets. Of these, the two most
pertinent aspects would be mobility, meaning that learners can use
them as ongoing tools at all times quickly and easily at any time that
they choose, and the interactivity of the device with the surroundings,
other devices, or people. Both of these factors combine to mean that
learning opportunities can be found in the contexts in which the
devices are used. The ecosystem of language learning with technology
is a primary area of interest to practitioners, and understanding how
theory has been applied to MALL can help to give insights into better
practice in teaching and research. Moreover, the motivation that
learners have for using mobile devices and how motivation can be
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 99
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
affected by using technology – and vice versa – can have a direct
impact on how, when, where, and why learners will use these devices
for learning both inside and outside of the classroom (Stockwell,
2013). Autonomy is also a key element of discussion surrounding
the use of MALL, which is closely related to both motivation and
training (which is discussed in Chapter 6) and the social relationships
that take place between teachers and learners (see Chapter 2; Lewis,
2014). The discussion that follows focusses on four elements which
are thought to be of particular relevance to MALL, looking from
differing but nonetheless interrelated perspectives. These are theories
of technology, theories of complexity, theories of motivation, and
social models of language learning, as described in turn in the
following subsections.
5.5.1 Theories of Technology
As technology is quite often the most visible part of the learning
environment (Stockwell, 2009), it is logical that there has been a lot
of focus on this technological aspect. There are four areas where
theory regarding technology in MALL is thought to be of particular
relevance: theories surrounding the design of tasks and activities,
theories of attitudes towards technology, theories of digital literacy,
and theories of the impact of technology on users. These are illustrated
in Table 5.1, but it should be noted that not all of these theories have
featured in MALL research to date, and some remain at the theoretical
level without empirical evidence in either CALL or MALL, while
others have appeared only in studies relating to CALL only.
As the table shows, MALL research that applies theories associated
with task design do appear in the literature, and this provides evidence
of a solid understanding of the importance theory as a foundation for
the design for mobile devices. Although these can overlap, design here
can refer to design of tasks themselves and also to the design of
artefacts or even interfaces. Chapter 8 explains design in more detail
and how this can be related to practice in MALL.
Research that explores learners’ willingness to use mobile technolo-
gies for language learning has also been the focus of research a number
of studies being carried out over the past several years (e.g., Chen,
2013; Dashti & Aldashti, 2015; Kondo, Ishikawa, Smith, Sakamoto,
Shimomura & Wada, 2012; Yang, 2012; see also Chapter 4).
Notably, there is a lack of empirical research that looks at the appli-
cation of digital literacies specifically to MALL, despite the fact that
there has been quite a lot of discussion of the importance of digital
literacies in education and language learning in general (Dudeney,
Hockly & Pegrum, 2013; Hauck & Kurek, 2017). Lastly, theories
100 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that examine the impact that mobile technologies can have on
learners’ cognition and attention has yet to be seen in either MALL
or CALL research, but these have the potential to shed light on the
ways that technologies can alter the ways that learners think and
behave as a result of mobile technologies. A selection of these theories
is explained in the following paragraphs. Considering the wide range
Table 5.1 Theories related to technology relevant to MALL research
Category Theory/Model Examples
Design Multimedia
theory
Item response
theory
Dual coding
theory
Situated action
Spaced learning
Cognitive load
theory
Activity theory
Situated learning
iPAC framework
TPACK
ADDIE model
Lee, Lo, and Chin (2019)²
Browne and Culligan (2008)²; Chen
and Chung (2008)
Lin and Yu (2017)
Suchman (1987, 2007)¹
Zhang, Song and Burston (2011),
Nakata (2017)²
Hong, Hwang, Tai and Lin (2019)
Lin, Lin, Liu, Kou, Kulikova & Lin
2019
Huang, Yang, Chiang and Su (2016)
Burden and Kearney (2018)¹,
Koenraad (2019)
Mishra and Koehler (2006)¹; Hsu
(2016)
Branch (2009), Heift and Caws
(2014)
Attitudes towards
technology
TAM
UTAUT*
Al-Emran, Mezhuyev and Kamaludin
(2018)
Gan and Zhong (2016)
Digital literacy Sociocultural
literacies
Critical literacies
Multimodal
literacies*
Media literacies
Mills, 2016¹
Hafner (2014)², Pegrum (2014)
Lotherington and Jenson (2011)¹
Buckingham (2007)¹
Impact of
technology
Distributed
cognition(s)*
Dual systems
theory*
Stockwell (2014)¹
Davazdahemami, Hammer and Soror
(2016)¹
Note: Examples that refer to the theory without examples from CALL or MALL
are marked with a “1,” and studies that relate to CALL but not MALL are marked
with a “2.”
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 101
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
of theories listed here, only a sample of these theories has been
explained in depth, marked with an asterisk in the table.
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT):
Originally developed by Ventakesh, Morris, Davis, and Davis (2003),
this was designed to go beyond just the simple acceptance of technology
such as that proposed by Davis (1989) in the Technology Acceptance
Model (TAM). The TAM has faced criticism for its lack of ability to
predict learner behaviour with technology (Legris, Ingham & Collerette
2003; Turner, Kitchenham, Brereton, Charters & Budgen, 2010),
so the UTAUT aimed to explore further the mental processes
behind viewpoints of technology in order to predict usage as well. It is
based on four core variables – namely performance expectancy,
effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitating conditions – as
well as four moderating variables – gender, age, experience, and volun-
tariness of use. It is based on eight models: (1) Theory of Reasoned
Action, (2) Technology Acceptance Model, (3) Motivation Model,
(4) Theory of Planned Behavior, (5) Model of PC Utilization,
(6) Innovation Diffusion Theory, (7) Social Cognitive Theory, and
(8) Combined Technology Acceptance Model and Theory of Planned
Behavior. It represents an extremely thorough examination of the
major models that may contribute to learner views and usage of tech-
nology, but does lack cultural reference, which may be an important
contributing factor in examining how technology is used and viewed
(Im, Hong & Kang, 2011). Though not without limitations, it has great
potential as a means of explaining learner willingness and actual usage
of technology.
Multimodal literacies: The concept of multimodal literacies is based
solidly on work by Kress (2003, 2010) and Cope and Kalantzis (2000)
and argues that humans are constantly engaging in communication
that goes beyond just the written word and includes pictorial and
audio modes as well. Lotherington and Jenson (2011) maintain that
the affordances of technology naturally facilitates multimodality in
communication, and humans require literacy skills in order to make
sense of the multimodal cues that they are constantly exposed to
during this communication. Although multimodal messages are a
normal part of human communication, when these messages are
facilitated through technology, they can become filtered as a result of
the technological limitations which can result in a different communi-
cation experience. Needless to say, this is highly applicable to MALL
in that the size of the screen and methods of inputting can have an
effect on the way in which communication is carried out, but mobile
technologies also mean that learners can have constant access to
multiple modes of information that may be applicable to their
102 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learning. This is particularly important for communication that is
required through certain modes, and having access to required infor-
mation in that mode and supported by other modes can result in
facilitating successful communication or providing useful learning
opportunities. The prerequisite for this, however, is having sufficient
literacy to decode, comprehend, and encode multimodal information
appropriately.
Distributed cognition(s): The concept of “distributed cognition”
was proposed by Hutchins (1991) as a part of organisational manage-
ment, and its educational applications were explored as distributed
cognitions by Salomon (1993). In short, the underlying tenet of dis-
tributed cognition is that we support our internal cognition (i.e., in the
human mind) through external tools around us (i.e., using something
to help facilitate our thinking). An example of this would be a com-
puter keyboard, where we have the letters written on each of the keys
to remind us where each of the keys are. When we are typing, we are
largely able to type sentences without looking at the keyboard, but we
may find that we refer to the letters written on the keyboard to help us
to remember which key is which if we suddenly wish to type a single
letter out of context. We currently use mobile devices to store infor-
mation that we no longer commit to our own memories, and in this
sense, we are distributing our cognitions between our biological brain
with the mobile device to reduce our own mental load. This has also
been known as the Google effect, where people can easily use mobile
devices to carry out Internet searches for information rather than
trying to commit it to memory. The reliance on this readily available
information has been shown to reduce how much is committed to
memory (Sparrow, Liu & Wegner, 2011), suggesting that having
constant access to information can diminish our willingness to remem-
ber facts. The impact on education and assessment has been raised as a
concern. Dikkers (2014), who points out, “Can we proactively con-
tinue to define teaching and learning as relevant? For instance, con-
sider the need for massive amounts of memorized data . . . if a student
can find information in less than thirty seconds, is it worth testing
them on it?” (p. 111). To this end, the impact of distributed cognition
on MALL may be considered as potentially a large one, although the
need to memorise data will differ depending on the content, and other
uses such as searching for expressions through accessing corpus data
can be a way in which mobile devices can change the ways in which
learners memorise or seek out new information.
Dual systems theory: A theory that can help to explain the distrac-
tive effect of technology that can detract from time spent on task both
inside and outside of class (see Chapter 7) is dual systems theory.
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 103
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
While this has yet to appear broadly in research on language teaching
and learning, it has attracted a good deal of support in research on
human behaviour since it was proposed by Evans (2003, 2008) as a
model of dual processing of cognition and reasoning. As Lyngs et al.
(2019, p. 1) describe, the central tenet of dual systems theory is “a
major distinction between swift, parallel and non-conscious ‘System 1’
processes, and slower, capacity-limited and conscious ‘System 2’ pro-
cesses” (see Figure 5.1). A person engaging in a task or activity such as
listening to a lecture or reading an academic paper diverts his or her
conscious attention towards this task using System 2. The temptation
to check a smartphone notification is part of System 1, which is the
Figure 5.1 A dual systems theory model (Lyngs et al., 2019, p. 5)
104 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
unconscious level of processing by which a person might perform
actions such as scratching a mosquito bite, and it has been used to
account for mobile phone and Internet addiction (Davazdahemami,
Hammer & Soror, 2016).
In order to not undertake an unconscious or habitual action, System
2 must be working at a conscious level to prevent scratching the
mosquito bite or yielding to the temptation to check the smartphone
notification through self-regulation. This self-regulation is, according
to Lyngs et al. (2019), affected by the person’s capacity limitations or
their emotional state or level of fatigue. Capacity limitations dominate
if the task that the person needs to undertake is not sufficiently
represented in their working memory at the time of the action,
whereas a poor emotional state or high level of fatigue results in lower
levels of self-regulation. This theory has immediate and obvious impli-
cations for MALL. Providing tasks and activities that overload the
capacity limitations of learners means that there is a greater likelihood
that learners will be unable to fully activate their working memory,
thus requiring them to exercise a greater degree of self-regulation over
their temptations to check their mobile devices. Making learners
aware of the fact that poor mood and tiredness can lead to a higher
susceptibility to distractions can also help them to plan their time and
avoid interrupted task engagement times as a result of a failure to
regulate their unconscious system.
5.5.2 Theories of Complexity
Theories that have been proposed to explain the nonlinear nature of
many phenomena of the natural sciences have been termed as com-
plexity theories. These find their roots in chaos theory, which is a
branch of mathematics which seeks to identify the dynamical systems
that underly seemingly random irregularities and disorder. It is also
related to the butterfly effect, coined by Lorenz (1972), who posed the
question, “Does the flap of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a
tornado in Texas?”
Complex systems theory: The past decade has seen a surge in
discussion of the complex nature of language learning, largely
prompted by the highly influential work by Larsen-Freeman (1997,
2002), who argued that current theories of language learning fail to
explain and predict the learning process consistently. Larsen-Freeman
and Cameron (2008) contended that a limitation with theory in lan-
guage teaching and learning is that it removes the dynamic aspects of
the systems they seek to describe, treating them as being fixed points
that are not subject to change. The application of complex systems has
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 105
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
spread rapidly into a range of areas within language teaching and
learning since then, with the concept being applied to areas as varied
as motivation (Dörnyei, MacIntyre & Henry, 2015), teacher cognition
(Feryok, 2010), learner agency (Mercer, 2011), developmental cogni-
tive neuroscience of language learning (Hohenberger & Peltzer-Karpf ,
2009), and even language itself (Ellis & Larsen-Freeman, 2009). To a
certain extent, looking at language learning through a complexity
theory lens helps to ease the tension that exists between theories and
to explain unexpected outcomes, but it has also faced criticism
regarding its applicability to language and language learning and for
lacking in detail to form a foundation on which to analyse second-
language acquisition data (e.g., Gregg, 2010). Hiver and Al-Hoorie
(2020) have, however, explored the possibilities of carrying out
research based on complexity theory principles and have described
the problems associated with generalisability and causality, outlining
numerous quantitative and qualitative methods in order to make sense
of the interplay of factors in a language learning ecology.
It has only been relatively recently that areas such as motivation in
language teaching and learning have been viewed from a complex
dynamics system theory perspective (see Dörnyei, MacIntire &
Henry, 2015), but this perspective on motivation has enabled research-
ers to look beyond snapshots of a learner’s motivation at a given point
in time, and to account for the fluid nature of motivation over time
(Schumann, 2015). Larsen-Freeman (2017) discusses three lessons
drawn from discussion on complexity theory that continue to challenge
research into second-language teaching and learning; (1) the applicabil-
ity and appropriateness of dichotomies, which may serve to oversim-
plify phenomena; (2) whether and where boundaries can be drawn
between a system and its environment; and (3) the difficulties in gener-
alisation caused by rejection of simple linear causality. Given the com-
plexity and dynamism of language learning, it is not surprising that
criticism regarding linear and structured theories that try to account for
the language learning process has taken on increasing prominence. The
complex systems theory approach to analysing language teaching and
learning environments provides us with insights into this immensely
intricate process but also makes us keenly aware of the need to conduct
systematic research to refine our understanding of the relationships
between theories of second-language teaching and learning.
5.5.3 Theories of Motivation
Motivation and autonomy are perhaps two of the foremost areas
which have relevance to mobile learning, although many claims
106 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
regarding the motivational aspects of technology have been exces-
sively optimistic views (see Chapter 2). The past few years have seen
various newer theories that attempt to explain the factors behind the
learner being involved in learning for a longer or more consistent
period of time, and research has focussed on both the internal and
external factors that are thought to be relevant to learning and have
considered how to promote motivation that will result in more sus-
tained language learning with the hope of leading to more successful
learning outcomes.
Motivation has seen a renewed interest in the past two decades or so
(e.g., Dörnyei, 2001; Dörnyei & Ushioda, 2011), and theories of
motivation seek to identify the reasons behind learners engaging in
studying other languages, the features of the language learning envir-
onment that may have an impact on the way they view the language
and learning materials, and the way that learners engage in particular
activities. As Grabe (2009, p. 176) points out, the “beliefs, values, and
expectations [learners hold] are influenced by a range of external
social and contextual factors,” which can link directly to effective
learning behaviour (Guthrie & Wigfield, 2000). From this discussion,
the importance of motivation is immediately obvious, as it can have a
direct influence on what learners do inside and outside of the class-
room in both the short and long term.
Expectancy-value theory: Originally proposed by Eccles, Adler,
Futterman, Goff, Kaczala, Meece and Midgley (1983), the underlying
precept of this theory is that motivation for engaging in a task is based
on a combination of the beliefs that a learner holds about their ability
to acquire a new skill, their expectations in the future with regards to
their prospect of developing further in the skill, and the value that they
place on the tasks and activities that are assigned to them in meeting
these expectations. There are parallels with expectancy-value theory
and self-efficacy theory or agency developed by Bandura (1997), who
argues that motivation to engage in learning activities will depend
upon the “beliefs in one’s capabilities to organize and execute the
courses of action required to produce given attainments” (p. 3). The
relevance of this theory for second-language learning – including of
course learning through mobile devices – is clear. The relationships
that learners draw between their current (and future) ability to acquire
the target language and the tasks that are assigned to them is likely to
have an impact on the way in which they engage in the activities. There
have been several cases of learning through mobile devices where
learners were encouraged to engage in language learning activities
outside of class, but actual usage did not reflect usage indicated in
pre-surveys (e.g., Kim, Rueckert, Kim & Seo, 2013). One possible
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 107
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
explanation for this is that the learners failed to see the relevance of the
particular activities that were assigned to them and their view of their
ability to acquire the target language. Understanding the potential
relationship between learner beliefs and expectations can play an
important role in determining learner engagement in the activities.
Attribution theory: Another theory that has featured quite promin-
ently in studies regarding motivation, attribution theory, looks at the
factors that the learner may consider as contributing to their successes
or failures in the learning process. It has undergone several revisions
over the years, including various degrees of detail, but the interpret-
ation of this theory by Weiner (2010) as shown in Figure 5.2 shows
the complexities that might be involved in developing and maintaining
learner motivation. To some degree, it does include overlap of the
expectancy-value theory within the interplay of factors, but these are
made more explicitly clear in attribution theory.
Self-determination theory: As described before, the idea of extrinsic
and intrinsic motivation has been one of interest to psychologists for
several years, and the idea of how internally driven motivation can
impact the learning process forms the foundation of self-determination
theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985, 2009; Deci & Moller, 2007). Gardner
and his colleagues (Gardner, 1985; Gardner & Lambert, 1972;
Gardner & MacIntyre, 1991) describe intrinsic motivation as referring
to the desire to engage in some activity for the satisfaction that the
activity brings, whereas extrinsic motivation is engaging in some
activity in order to achieve another goal that is not directly related to
Outcome
Outcome
If positive,
happy
If unexpected
negative, or
important
If negative,
frustrated and
sad
Specific
information
a. Past
personal
history
b. Social
norms
Etc.
Achievement
Ability
Effort
Strategy
Task
Luck
Etc.
Achievement
Striving
Intensity
Latency
Persistence
Etc.
Hope
Hopelessness
Stability
Controllability Shame
Guilt
Locus
Cognitive
and
Affective
Pride
Self-esteem
Expectancy
of success
Affiliation
Physical
characteristics
Personality
Availability of
target
Etc.
Causal rules
Actor vs.
observer
perspective
Hedonic
biases
Etc.
Outcome
dependent
affect
Causal
antecedents Causal
ascriptions
Causal
dimensions
Psychological
consequences
Behavioral
consequences
Figure 5.2 Attribution-based theory of intrapersonal motivation (Weiner, 2010,
p. 34)
108 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the activity itself. As Williams, Mercer and Ryan (2015) point out,
treating external and intrinsic motives as a dichotomy is overly sim-
plistic and can mask the insterplay that can take place between them.
Self-determination theory is made up of three basic human needs –
autonomy, competence, and relatedness – and it focusses on the
motivations behind a learner’s actions to understand the degree to
which they are self-determined.
Directed motivational currents: This is a more recent theory of long-
term motivation and is proposed by Dörnyei, Muir, and Henry
(2016). This theory includes a combination of factors from the learner
to the teacher, in that the teacher can play a role in leading learners
into the motivation that they need to engage actively in their learning.
One area where there has been a noticeable lack of attention in
motivational studies has been with regards to longer-term motivation,
which is what Dörnyei, Henry, and Muir’s motivational currents
attempt to address. The basic premise of the theory is that learners
will see some kind of goal that they can work towards, and during that
time, that they become engrossed in the learning process so that they
are able to carry out their learning with a relatively high degree of
autonomy. The theory differs from flow theory (Csikszentmihalyi,
1990), which tends to be shorter in duration where the learner may
“lose themselves” in the moment. Motivational currents, as the name
suggests, sees learners pulled along by their motivation, such as pre-
paring for a test or a trip to the target language country, in such a way
that they do not find the study to be particularly burdensome as long
as they are in the current. The directed part of this theory is that the
teacher can play a role in setting the learners into the current that
keeps them engaged in their learning for a longer period of time.
5.5.4 Social Models of Language Learning
The dangers in viewing language acquisition in isolation from the
social environment was proposed by Kramsch (2002), who argues
that all of the relationships that learners engage in can have an impact
on not only the language that they acquire but also the way in which
they acquire it. Social models of language learning are far from new to
the literature and are open to varying interpretations that place differ-
ent emphasis on the cognitive and social elements that may comprise
social interaction. Interpersonal undertones may even exist in theories
of language learning that are not typically associated with social
models, but the inherent social nature of these approaches is undeni-
able. A stronger cognitive influence is evident in interactionist
accounts of second-language acquisition such as the interaction
5.5 Theories Relevant to MALL 109
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
hypothesis proposed by Long (1981, 1996), which argues for the need
for interaction as a means of acquiring language through provision of
conditions for negotiation of meaning (e.g., Pica, 1991) and compre-
hensible output (Swain, 1995). This has often been pointed out that
the interaction account provides the theoretical foundation for many
studies using CMC (e.g., Hubbard & Levy, 2016), where learners may
interact with other learners, native speakers, or the teacher as a means
of acquiring lexical and syntactic aspects of the target language. The
relationship between technology and language learning, and in par-
ticular the social aspect of exposure to contextualised language
through the Internet, has been recognised for many years now
(Kramsch, 2002), and it is not surprising that these social models have
come more to the forefront over the past several years. Two models
that are of particular relevance, sociocultural theory and language
socialisation, are described next.
Sociocultural theory: Approaches that look more at the social
aspects of learning are typically based on Vygotskian perspectives
that advocate that learning arises from social interaction, where
novices can bridge the gaps in the knowledge they need to perform
required tasks through interaction with relative experts (Vygotsky,
1978). Sociocultural theory, popularised by Lantolf and others (e.g.,
Lantolf, 1994; Lantolf & Pavlenko, 1995), is one such theory that is
based on Vygotskian principles and views language learning as a
social interactive process. Although there has been debate about
what sociocultural theory actually refers to (Lantolf & Thorne,
2006), it has been used quite widely in research into learning
through technology (see Levy & Stockwell, 2006, for further
discussion).
As Hubbard and Levy (2016) point out, social interaction can be
augmented through the use of virtual technologies that enable learners
to carry out collaborative activities remotely using interactive virtual
environments such as Second Life (e.g., Wang, Deutschmann &
Steinvall, 2013) or other types of online role-playing games (e.g.,
Peterson, 2012). Another perspective often associated with social
aspects of learning is collaborative learning (Nah, White & Sussex,
2008), where learners may benefit from the social interactions that
may arise from learning with others.
Language socialisation: The goal of language learning for an
increasing number of learners is to engage in communication with
others almost exclusively through electronic means, primarily some
form of social media. The distinction between these types of digital
communication and face-to-face communication has been the focus of
research very much since digital communication became more
110 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
mainstream (e.g., Collot & Belmore, 1996), and various differences
have been identified. In saying this, the language of the various forms
of electronic communication through the tools that are used on a day-
to-day basis is in a state of flux, and the standards of what constitutes
appropriate conventions for communication are subject to evolution
over time. For example, early email messages closely resembled writ-
ten letters, with formal greetings (e.g., “Dear Mary”) and closures
(e.g., “Sincerely”). While these conventions are still used for certain
forms of email communication, it is also appropriate to send replies to
messages that are as simple as a single word of acknowledgement that
is void of any formal greetings whatsoever, or people may respond by
intentionally threading replies to specific questions throughout their
email messages.
Many of the conventions that used to be a part of synchronous
textual communication have seen a steady decline, such as smileys that
are made up of characters like :-) (which, interestingly, I had to force
back into text after my word processing software automatically
changed the text into ). These symbols have largely been replaced
by the use of emoticons or stickers to express language in lieu of prose,
although there are also cultural and social dimensions associated with
the selection of different non-linguistic symbols such at emoticons,
emoji, and stickers, meaning that there are different sociocultural rules
associated with the selection of these symbols and the meanings that
are attached to them, all of which need to be acquired by language
learners who communicate through digital means such as messaging
apps or social media. Language socialisation refers to how speakers of
a language modify their language to meet the conventions of a social
context (Garrett & Baquedano-López, 2002; Schieffelin & Ochs,
1986). Children engage in some kind of language socialisation from
the time that they first become cognizant of communicating with
others, and this phenomenon is also evident in second-language
learners (e.g., Duff, 2012). In this way, users who interact through
the multifarious social media and communication tools will invariably
follow the general practices of that particular tool, imitating styles and
emoticon and sticker use they see. For language learners, the examples
that they see in social media or more personal messaging can provide
valuable data to guide them in how to make linguistic and non-
linguistic choices in their interactions.
5.6 Summary
As pointed out in a number of places in this chapter, theory plays a
very central role in what happens in both research and practice.
5.6 Summary 111
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Theory can shape both research and practice and can have an impact
on how we view a situation and how data are collected, analysed, and
interpreted. From this point of view, we need to have a clear idea of
what theory or theories we are applying, as well as our rationale for
adoption of such theories. The adoption of technology does not pre-
clude this need, and the relevance of theory to MALL will depend very
much on what elements of language are to be acquired and the
methods that are used to teach these language elements. Very much
like CALL, MALL is likely to see theoretical pluralism, where theories
will need to take into account the design process, the pedagogical
principles for learning either inside or outside of class, and the con-
ducting research that explores the impact that MALL can have on the
teaching and learning environment. The link with social and inter-
actional aspects that mobile devices afford, as well as the propensity
for distractions that also seems to go hand-in-hand with using mobile
devices in learning contexts, both inside and outside of the device, will
also need to feature quite prominently in discussions of theory.
Understanding how mobile devices form a part of the daily lives of
users will be key in determining which theories are applicable and,
through systematic exploration of learner behaviour in mobile learn-
ing, can play a role in further predicting patterns of engagement in
language learning tasks and activities.
Theory – both in the theory-building stage and after it has gained
acceptance – has an impact on research, not only the focus of research,
but also the ways in which data are collected and analysed, the
interpretation of the results, and the conclusions drawn from them.
Theory forms the foundation for essentially all that teachers require of
learners inside and outside of the classroom and the ways in which this
is viewed and analysed by researchers. It has been argued that applied
linguistics is becoming a field where there is a widening gap between
researchers and practitioners (Kramsch, 2015), and care needs to be
taken to ensure that the practice-oriented focus of language teaching
and learning is not forgotten at the expense of theory that is not
applicable to better practice. As described earlier in this chapter,
correct use of theory can help to predict patterns of behaviour that
can be shaped through the “necessary intervention” prescribed by
Breakwell and Rose (2006). The hypothesis testing which goes behind
theory development adds to the credibility of research and practice,
which is founded on appropriate theories for the given environment.
Taking the time to fully appreciate the theories which have been
postulated regarding a particular phenomenon can deepen the aware-
ness of researchers and teachers, which has the potential to bring
about better practice in both.
112 Theory in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
As Richards and Rodgers (2014) point out, a teaching approach
should be based on both a theory of language and a theory of learning,
and both aspects interrelate to form the basis of how a language is
learned. These theories may not be completely formalised, and infor-
mal theories have the potential to provide insights into a given phe-
nomenon, but formal theory allows for more solid testing of the theory
allowing a greater understanding of the phenomena (Price, 2012). In
MALL, theory is gradually taking a key role in research and practice
that is being undertaken, but care needs to be exercised to ensure that
we don’t fall into the trap of “theory shopping” (Levy & Stockwell,
2006), where theories are sought and applied post hoc to collected
data in order to somehow validate anticipated results of a study, often
in lieu of a theory being considered at the outset of a study.
Understanding and appreciating formal theories is key to avoid
reinventing the wheel, but it is helpful to not become overly dependent
on current theories without questioning their applicability to a wide
range of contexts. The role that technology plays, and in particular
mobile devices, can have a profound impact on research and practice
and, ultimately, also on theory. Theories of MALL need to consider
the way that mobile devices alter the ways that we as humans function
in their entirety, including how we seek out and process information,
engage in social relationships, set and meet short-term and long-term
goals, and understand and represent the world around us in textual,
audio, and visual formats. Based on this foundation, it becomes pos-
sible to see how learning has been transformed, and through solid
theory building, we can start to predict how best to take advantage of
mobile devices to benefit learning from a broader and more
stable perspective.
5.7 Discussion Questions
1. How do you think that theory affects language teaching? If you
have experience as a language teacher, have you ever felt that your
practice has been impacted by one or more theories? Why or
why not?
2. If you are to use a theoretical foundation for your research, at what
point do you decide what theory or theories will be relevant? Why
do you think so? How do you choose an appropriate theory?
3. Is it possible to use conflicting theories as the framework for a
teaching or research approach? Why do you think so? Try to
give examples.
5.7 Discussion Questions 113
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
6 Physical, Psychosocial and
Pedagogical Issues
6.1 Introduction
Despite the various benefits that mobile devices can bring into teaching
and learning contexts, there have continued to be issues that have
surrounded their integration into education as serious tools. The
physical characteristics of mobile devices such as screen size and input
methods have long been issues when considering their applicability for
learning, but they have often been considered as a necessary trade-off
in order to maintain their portability. In addition to this, however,
there are also psychosocial issues, considering the position of mobile
devices in the minds of the learners and teachers. The perceptions of
mobile devices are often a product of the social context in which they
are used, and this will likely vary depending on the region, the socio-
economic status, the age group of the users, and so forth. Finally, the
issue of pedagogy when learning through mobile devices is discussed,
and the range of considerations that need to be kept in mind to enable
successful integration of MALL in terms of achieving learning goals
and sustaining task engagement. While these factors are discussed
separately, it is pertinent to bear in mind that there are certainly
overlaps between them that have a mutual impact on one another.
The physical, pedagogical, and psychosocial considerations regarding
using mobile technology for language teaching and learning each has the
potential to have a large, but rather different, impact on the language
learning and teaching process. As has been raised several times in the
previous chapters, there are several concerns with using mobile devices
that must always be kept in mind. The affordances of mobile devices for
learning – such as their portability, the technological affordances, and the
fact that they usually carried to both learning and non-learning loca-
tions – have been discussed in some depth in Chapter 2. However, the
limitations associated with using mobile devices in educational contexts
cannot be ignored, as will be discussed in more depth later in the chapter.
114
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
It is essential to realise that from the learners’ perspective, their mobile
devices – in particular mobile phones – may not even be considered as
being “proper” education devices in the first instance. Balancing between
these learning and non-learning uses may contribute to facilitating fur-
ther engagement in language learning tasks and activities on learners’
mobile devices (Steel, 2012). As has been alluded to in Chapter 3, there
are differences in the roles that mobile devices will assume when looking
at formal and informal learning situations, partially in the ways in which
mobile devices may fit into the larger learning environment. Looking
holistically, mobile devices can fulfil specific functions within the learning
context, but it can be assumed that they will typically be complemented
by other technological and non-technological means.
Informal learning is likely to be made up of learners seeking out for
themselves different learning resources and deciding on the timing of
when, where, and how to use these resources. In formal learning
contexts, it would be expected that teachers would provide learners
with direction regarding what to use and when. There may be some
freedom in the timing, but for the most part in formal contexts,
learners will most likely be given guidance regarding when they are
expected to complete mobile tasks and activities, typically governed by
the constraints of the course.
6.2 Physical Issues
The physical aspect of mobile devices is the most visible concern
regarding mobile learning, and it is therefore not surprising that the
small screen size and input methods are often cited as limitations of
MALL in the literature (e.g., Kim, Rueckert, Kim & Seo, 2013; Rosell-
Aguilar & Kan, 2015). However, as Koole (2009) points out, there are
other factors that are thought to have an impact on the way in which
mobile devices are used, ranging from these two primary issues to
storage capacity, processor speed, battery life, compatibility, and net-
work access, as is shown in Figure 6.1.
6.2.1 Screen Size
The issue of screen size is, to some degree, an inevitable one, given the
fact that portability is an indispensable part of what makes a mobile
device mobile, and as such, there will necessarily be limitations as to
the size of the screen itself can reach. Improving resolution of the
screen means that more information can be included on small screens,
however, and smaller text and pictures can be used without detracting
too much from readability.
6.2 Physical Issues 115
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
6.2.2 Input Methods
The on-screen keyboard is a feature of most modern smartphones that
makes it much easier to type than the keypads on the pre-smartphone
GSM phones, but the very nature of it being “on-screen” means is that
it must occupy a certain percentage of the screen in order to be usable.
Functions such as autocorrect can counteract less accurate typing,
but as most people have experienced at some point or another, the
accuracy is sometimes questionable, and sometimes correctly typed
words are replaced by incorrect alternatives. The accuracy of voice
recognition has improved dramatically over the past few years,
making it a viable means of converting ideas into text, taking a little
or none of the screen space. Finally, it may be possible to supplement
the native inputting methods by using a Bluetooth or other wireless
keyboard.
6.2.3 Storage Capacity
Storage capacity on modern mobile devices is another area where we
have seen great improvement in recent years, largely as a result of a
reduction in prices of storage media that may make up a part of the
built-in storage. Many mobile devices come with lower-end or
higher-end pricing options, where the lower-end models typically
have far less storage compared to the higher-end models. The more
Mobile
Learning
Screen size
Input
methods
Storage
capacity
Processor
speed
Battery life
Compatibility
Network
access
Figure 6.1 Physical issues of mobile learning
116 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
expensive models may be too expensive for many students who then
opt for the lower-end models and, therefore, have smaller amounts of
storage available to them.
6.2.4 Processor Speed
The last several years have brought significant changes in processor
speed of mobile devices, at least in terms of the experience of users.
While, of course, there are fundamental differences in the ways in
which processors in PCs and mobile devices such as smartphones
operate, most users do not notice speed differences unless using mul-
tiple apps simultaneously. It should be pointed out that that nearly
half of the world’s mobile phone owners still have a GSM phone
(Statistica Research Department, 2018), meaning that care should be
taken to avoid assumptions that all users will have access to fast
processors in their devices.
6.2.5 Battery Life
An ongoing problem with mobile devices has been the life of the
battery, which has become more of an issue with more powerful
processors and larger screens that require more power to keep running.
Mobile phones will most likely be used primarily for personal pur-
poses, and some learners have voiced concerns that they may not have
enough battery for these personal uses if they use them for learning
tasks and activities during the day (Stockwell, 2010). Despite some
recent improvements in battery life with newer battery cell, processor,
and display technologies, extended use of a mobile device still seems to
drain the battery at a level that would make it difficult to use it for a full
day without a charge, and this is also likely to influence users’ decisions
regarding using it for learning, in that they may choose to use it only
when they have charging capabilities on hand.
6.2.6 Compatibility
The period of transfer from GSM phones to smartphones also brought
difficulties with compatibility, and the totally different software and
hardware made it difficult to design comparable applications between
them. Even with an extremely high penetration rate of smartphones
being achieved in many locations around the world, compatibility
problems have also been evident in mobile learning applications, with
apps typically designed for iOS or Android devices. One method that
has been used to attempt to deal with the problem of incompatibility
6.2 Physical Issues 117
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
between native apps for iOS and Android is the use of web apps,
where the app relies on web technologies such as HTML5 that can be
accessed over the Internet. The downside is that this type of system will
generally rely on having an Internet connection for the bulk of oper-
ations (although it is possible to store data on the device itself ), but the
trade-off with compatibility may well make it a viable option when
learners are coming to teaching and learning environments with
differing technologies.
6.2.7 Network Access
Studies have shown that learners exhibit resistance to using their
mobile devices for learning purposes when there is the possibility that
they will have to pay for network access above and beyond their
monthly limits (e.g., Stockwell, 2008). Thus, the use of applications
requiring heavy data usage would naturally be expected to see a
detrimental effect on engagement if learners do not have access to
Wi-Fi.
The physical affordances will vary to some degree depending on the
type of device being used, but there has been a shift towards a merging
of devices to mobile phones and tablets (and hybrid “phablets”) as
multifunctional tools rather than using different devices for different
purposes. MP3 players, PDAs, web browsers, and so on are now
functions included in modern smartphones and tablets, meaning mul-
tiple devices are no longer necessary. Additionally, most modern
mobile devices have evolved to also allow for functions such as GPS,
QR codes, cloud computing, access to business software (word pro-
cessing apps, etc.), and various communication tools, all of which
offer opportunities for teaching and learning. The issues raised here
are discussed from the physical dimension only, as it is possible to
consider different psychosocial and pedagogical views even with
regards to the same physical characteristics, which are dealt with in
the following subsections.
6.3 Psychosocial Issues
As the name suggests, the discussion in this section can be largely
divided into two main parts – the psychological dimension and the
social dimension. While there are features that are unique to each
category, there is likely to be overlap between them. It is useful to
see the different ways that people use technologies in different cultures
and contexts, as there are also dangers in assuming that people from
different backgrounds will have the same expectations about the way
118 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
in which technology is used to accomplish various goals. In the context
of this section, the psychological dimension refers to the view of
mobile devices for learning, first of all in more general terms, but also
more specifically with regards to the different functions of mobile
devices for learning purposes. Earlier research has shown learners
see the potential for learning devices, but when presented with other
options, they are likely to choose a computer over a mobile phone,
mainly as a result of the view of a mobile phone as a more private
device rather than as a learning tool (Lai & Zheng, 2018; Stockwell,
2008, 2010). Comments from some of the participants in Lai and
Zheng’s study made their standpoint regarding technology clear, such
as “I usually use the laptop for study and the mobile for entertain-
ment” and “I would say, on the laptop I’m motivated to learn, but on
the mobile, I’m just killing time” (p. 309). These show learners’
distinction between mobile phones and laptops with regards to their
usefulness for learning.
While saying this, the view of mobile learning is a fluid one, and
there is ongoing research that suggests a shift of opinions about
learning through mobile devices. There would be little doubt that there
has been a significant decrease in the resistance towards using mobile
technologies for work or educational purposes in recent years, but the
view of mobile devices as a serious learning device is still somewhat
limited for many. Learners have shown a greater willingness to use
their mobile devices than in the past, but effective usage is dependent
upon having sufficient training to know how to use them specifically
for learning purposes, as described in the following section.
Psychological aspects of using mobile technologies can also include
the psychological impact of the learning environment itself. The loca-
tion and a context in which mobile devices are used will likely impact
the way in which users feel about engaging in learning through them.
For example, if a learner is using a mobile device in public transporta-
tion such as a train or bus, there are likely to be various distractions
that could affect their state of mind. The time taken for a learner to
redirect their attention back to the task after a distraction – such as
looking up to check a station or moving out of the way for others to
get on or off a train or bus – is also an important factor. While this is
also partially related to the pedagogical factors (see Section 6.4), it is
also a psychological one, in that it may affect some learners more than
others depending on their individual dispositions. The study of atten-
tion has been the focus of a number of theories over the past several
decades, with concepts such as the experience of attentional involve-
ment (Abuhamdeh & Csikszentmihalyi, 2012) and mindfulness
(Rechtschaffen, 2014) that seek to understand what is happening
6.3 Psychosocial Issues 119
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
when attention is focused intensely on the moment. They allude to the
fact that people can get “lost” in the moment of a task they are
engaged in if there is sufficient intrinsic motivation, and outside dis-
tractions are rarely noticed.
Distractions are not only limited to those in the surrounding environ-
ment but also may occur as a direct result of the device itself. Given that
most, if not all, mobile devices have constant Internet access, it means
that they are constantly checking servers for new information such as a
new email, a message to a service such as WhatsApp or Messenger, or a
post to a social networking service such as Facebook or Twitter. If new
information is detected, this will typically result in a push notification
being delivered to the phone. It is this push notification that has the
potential to be a distraction to the learner, who may have their attention
temporarily sidetracked by the notification even if they decide to attend
to it later. When learners direct their attention away from what they are
doing to deal with other things, it means that they need to take time to
redirect their focus back to the task at hand. It has been estimated that
this loss of attention can result in quite severe losses of time, possibly
even as much as 31.1 percent (Galluch, Long, Bratton, Gee & Groeber,
2009). While push notifications may also have legitimate pedagogical
functions (see the section on pedagogical issues in Section 6.4 and
Chapter 8), the potential to interrupt learner engagement also needs
to be factored into considerations regarding MALL. Firstly, if an indi-
vidual task is short enough and, to some degree, complete within itself,
then it is possible that learners will finish the task at hand before
checking the message. Furthermore, if learners are aware of the fact
that taking time out of their learning to check notifications has a
potential detrimental effect on the learning outcomes, then it may be
possible to discourage them from constantly checking these notifica-
tions. If they realise that it is difficult to control themselves regarding
checking messages, they may temporarily disable the notifications so
that they can use their time more effectively without disruption. One
problem with this is, however, that multiple studies (e.g., Roberts, Yaya
& Manolis, 2014) have shown that there are many people who suffer
anxiety if they do not access their devices constantly; in fact, the
prevalence of this is so widespread the medical term nomophobia (i.e.,
no mobile phone phobia) has been coined to describe it. When users
have their mobile devices in their hands, the temptation to check
messages through push notifications or to even pre-empt these notifica-
tions by checking individual social media may be too great to prevent
them from being constantly distracted as they use their devices.
While not directly related to the physical characteristics of the
device, there are psychological considerations that emerge as a direct
120 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
consequence of the device’s physical features, and some of them may
also have sociocultural implications. Users may feel less comfortable,
for example, about using a larger mobile device such as a laptop
computer on busy public transportation for fear interrupting people
around them. They may also be aware that others can see the screen of
their mobile device in public places and feel uncomfortable that others
may look over their shoulders to see what it is that they are studying.
This might be enough to discourage a learner from using the device,
even though they have access to learning materials and the time and
motivation to use them.
The psychosocial aspects can also have in impact on the classroom.
It is now considered quite normal for learners to bring mobile devices
into class in many contexts – most broadly at tertiary level, although
they are also seen at lower levels as well, depending on the policies at a
national, regional, or local level. As is described in Chapter 2, teacher
attitudes towards the use of mobile devices in their classrooms are
extremely varied (Berger, 2017), ranging from general acceptance
through to strong resistance, even to the extent of banning technolo-
gies in the classroom altogether (e.g., Fried, 2008; Yamamoto, 2007).
One of the largest concerns expressed by teachers regarding the use of
mobile devices in the classroom is that learners are distracted by the
device and unable to concentrate on class tasks and activities. A large
proportion of learners seem to hold on to the belief that they are quite
capable of successfully multitasking in class and are able to suitably
pay attention to the class with little negative impact from using their
technologies. Even if they are aware of the potential harmful effects of
multitasking, some learners still do engage in multitasking. The results
of research have also provided a rather bleak outlook on the ability to
learners to process the information which is presented to them if they
are engaged in other tasks, such as texting, web browsing, online
shopping, and social media. and even notetaking on computer.
Ophir, Nass and Wagner (2009), for example, conducted a study to
identify the effects of multitasking of university students who indicated
that they concurrently used multiple media. The result of the study
revealed that the vast majority of students were unable to filter out the
distractions effectively, clearly indicating the simultaneous use of
media had a detrimental effect on learners’ abilities to maintain their
concentration on the task at hand. They showed that heavy media
multitaskers were more likely to exhibit negative effects as a result of
engaging in tasks not directly related to the primary task, suggesting
that the more that learners engaged in off-task activities, the lower
their ability to direct sufficient attention towards it. Tassone, Liu, Reed
and Vickers (2017) found that learners who engaged less in
6.3 Psychosocial Issues 121
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
multitasking in class were able to attain a higher GPA (grade point
average), and even though the majority of learners in the study knew
that multitasking could result in decreased grades, they still regularly
engaged in it.
Multitasking does not only have to be limited to off-task activities,
and learners can also suffer from trying to complete multiple learning
tasks or activities at the same time. Contrary to the perspective pro-
posed by Prensky (2001) that college students of the digital generation
would make the most of digital resources for their learning, Flanigan
and Kiewra (2018) have argued these resources can, in fact, have a
debilitating effect. This is largely a result of the fact that multitasking is
actually the switching of attention between tasks rather than actually
engaging in multiple tasks at the same time (Rosen, 2012), meaning
that there are losses that occur as learners switch between these tasks.
Newell (2017) describes three primary efficiency costs that the so-
called digital generation may suffer from when they attempt to engage
in multitasking. The first of these is “switch costs,” which refers to the
time required to “switch” their mindset to the goals of the new task.
Secondly, there are “resumption lags,” meaning that it takes time to
return to the original task after engaging in the secondary task.
Thirdly, they may also suffer from a “restart cost,” where there is
reduced efficiency in the original task as they attempt to see where they
left off and to take stock of what they need to do next. Learners select
what they wish to direct their attention towards and then shift it to
something else in an ongoing process of selective attention shifting.
Their attention is diverted away from the primary task so they can do
other things for some period of time before returning to the original
task again. After returning back to the original task, it will take time
for the learner to backtrack over what they’ve done and to recom-
mence what they were doing.
In the classroom, the most prevalent form of multitasking is
cyberslacking, and despite the obvious negative effect on the ability
to concentrate on class activities, the trend of engaging in extraneous
activities during class time by students appears to be gradually increas-
ing. Respondents in Lauricella and Kay’s (2010) study of more than
500 students at a university in Canada indicated a large amount of
private use of portable devices during class time. Almost a third of the
students stated that they spent more than half of class time engaged in
instant messaging, sending non-academic emails, playing games, or
even watching movies. McCoy (2016) found that American college
students admitted to spending more than one-fifth of class time using a
digital device for non-class-related purposes. Of the reasons cited by
students for this behaviour, nearly two-thirds of students claimed that
122 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
they wanted to stay connected, and two-thirds said they use their
digital devices to fight boredom. Nearly 90 percent of students were
aware of the fact that they were not paying attention if they used the
digital devices in class, yet nearly 60 percent of respondents indicated
that they felt that their devices were not much of a distraction. At first
glance, it might appear that these two results are conflicting, but this is
not necessarily the case.
Why is it that learners engage in this behaviour despite being aware
of the potential dangers? A possible explanation for learners engaging
in non-task-related uses of mobile technologies in class could be
related to their addictive nature. There has been quite a lot written
in the past few years about the potential addictive effect of mobile
technologies and the impact that this addition can have on people’s
lives. It has been suggested that people spend an average of three hours
online every single day, with a quarter of users spending between two
to three hours looking at their smartphone screens every day (Alter,
2017), checking and sending text messages, or using Facebook or
other social networks (Rosen, 2012). Addiction to the Internet has
been a much-discussed aspect of user behaviour since the early days of
the Internet in terms of cue reactivity and craving (Brand, 2017), but
the rise of social media in the early 2000s seems to have further
exacerbated this problem, with addictive reactions to cues such as
the visual or audio notifications of incoming messages. Given the fact
that now most people have access to their social networks through a
combination of desktop and mobile technologies at any time, the issue
of addiction to social networking services such as Facebook is further
compounded (Wegmann, Stodt & Brand, 2018). This addition
extends not only to the cutting down of sleeping hours, but now it is
commonplace for there to be a general lack of concentration even
when users need to keep their attention directed on what they are
doing (see the discussion in Chapter 5 on dual systems theory).
Raising learner awareness towards the dangers of multitasking,
however, is proving to be a difficult undertaking. Learners in study
by Tassone, Liu, Reed and Vickers (2017) were asked to provide
details of their multitasking in class before and after being subjected
to a presentation about the detrimental effects of multitasking. The
results showed that there was no significant difference between the
learners who viewed the presentation and those who did not. This
indicates that learners are not multitasking because they are unaware
of the dangers, but, rather, they make a conscious decision about
dividing their attention between the multiple tasks that they are
engaged in and are willing to sacrifice some elements of attention that
might be used for learning purposes for their own private purposes.
6.3 Psychosocial Issues 123
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
It would seem, then, that if multitasking is something that cannot be
avoided, then perhaps there are ways of taking advantage of what we
know about learners’ tendency to use their mobile devices for multi-
tasking to make better use of their time and attention, which is being
split between the requirements of the classroom and the use of their
devices. Given that mobile devices have very much become the norm in
many classrooms, as Verbeek (2013) points out, the most important
consideration now is the “how” that exists between the “yes” and
“no” with regards to allowing learners to use their mobile devices in
class. In other words, if mobile devices are to be present in the
classroom, how can learners’ attention be kept focussed on where it
will benefit them the most? The issue of attention has featured in
psychology discussions for decades, and the most basic assumptions
underlying attention are that it is limited, it is selective, it is subject to
voluntary control, it controls access to consciousness, it is essential for
the control of action, and, of most importance for education, it is
essential for learning (Schmidt, 2009). As mentioned in Chapter 2, this
has wide-reaching implications for the ways in which classroom teach-
ing could or should be conducted. It would appear that people today
interact with information differently from how they did in the past,
switching rapidly between information sources at a shallow level and
not taking the time to read thoroughly (Carr, 2011). At the same time,
the addiction-like thirst for new information that is available through
newsfeeds and social media also keeps people fixated on their devices
even in circumstances and environments that are inappropriate or
even detrimental.
There are those however that argue that addiction to technology can
be desirable, particularly from a business perspective (Alter, 2017).
This addition has been cited as a rationale for the use of educational
gaming, where if learners are suitably addicted to game, then it is
possible for them to learn – perhaps subconsciously – as they engage
in it for extended periods of time. This is a complex issue that does
have the potential to keep learners engaged in activities for longer, but
the complexities, such as the balance between educational and enter-
tainment aspects, and the nature of tasks and activities that can
successfully be gamified should not be forgotten.
The social dimension looks at issues such as the digital divide, an
issue which can be exacerbated by the need placed on many learners to
provide their own devices, and it is not uncommon to see gaps between
those with more sophisticated devices and those that have devices on
the lower end of the spectrum. This has implications at both the
individual level and the societal level, where access to the Internet
through mobile devices may lead to a certain view of mobile learning
124 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that differs from regions where this access is easier to obtain. Further,
in a society where learners engage in private social uses on their mobile
devices, there are often demands placed on learners to use their social
networking tools for learning as well, which can have varying attitu-
dinal and even ethical concerns (Blyth, 2015). This can also relate to
the expectations for teachers to become more accessible to students
through their own provide social networking links that may infringe
upon their privacy.
There are also dangers in assuming that people from different
cultural backgrounds will have the same expectations about the way
in which technology is used to accomplish various goals. This has been
particularly evident in behaviours associated with autonomous behav-
iour (Schwienhorst, 2003) and self-directed use of technology (Lai,
Wang, Li & Hu, 2016), but this is to be expected to a certain degree,
given the influence of learners’ culture on their views of autonomy in
language learning (Palfreyman, 2003). The position of technology
within different societies can also shape their opinions of it, ranging
from commonplace to exclusive, and this is often a reflection of the
costs and accessibility of hardware, software, and Internet connectiv-
ity. If teachers are in environments where they have differing cultural
perspectives from their learners, there is a very real possibility that this
could lead to a mismatch in views of learning through technology for
both in-class and out-of-class purposes (Chik & Breidbach, 2014). For
example, teachers who come from backgrounds where technology is a
normal part of the classroom may find resistance from learners where
mobile devices are viewed more as personal tools. Finally, developing
critical digital literacies (see Chapter 5) can also play a crucial role in
alleviating cultural stereotypes (Pegrum, Dudeney & Hockly, 2018)
and is an important part of understanding of sociocultural differences
for both teachers and learners alike.
6.4 Pedagogical Issues
There are several potential ways to view technologies for learning
purposes (see Chun, Kern & Smith, 2016), but to look at mobile
device as a separate entity from more traditional technologies, this
section will look specifically at those points that are related to the
mobility, ubiquity, interactivity, and augmentation that mobile devices
make possible. Here the discussion will move from the physical aspects
as to what the implications are for second-language teaching
and learning.
One of the key issues associated with mobile learning that should be
kept in mind is that it is important to consider the affordances of
6.4 Pedagogical Issues 125
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
mobile devices and to design tasks and activities that can take advan-
tage of these affordances. Despite arguments of some researchers that
mobile learning should not just be a replication of computer-based or
paper-based tasks, it is possible to argue that there is indeed a time and
place for such replications, provided that these uses make a part of a
larger picture of learning through mobile devices. For example, having
access to static information that one might find on a piece of paper or a
PDF file from a mobile device means that this is available in locations
where one may not carry paper documents or computers as a result.
Although the required resource may be rather “analogue,” providing
access to it through a mobile device in lieu of other options is, in one
sense, taking advantage of the affordances of a mobile device. The
ability to use a mobile device to search for information that may
be required at unexpected times is another way that mobile devices
can be used in ways that may have typically been associated with more
traditional means, such as looking up a term in the dictionary or
performing an Internet search. The fact that modern mobile devices
can be used to store a large amount of information, to provide instant
access to resources online suggests that they can take on a reference
role, or even to communicate with others in the target language
directly or indirectly assists learners in completing required tasks or
activities.
Mobility and ubiquity will certainly include this ability to have
constant access to information and to be able to use the mobile device
as an ongoing reference tool, where learners are able to search for
information as required to serve a particular learning need (cf.,
Dikkers, 2014), as well as the potential of using mobile devices to
have assistance in learning within the contexts in which they need to
function using the target language in situated learning contexts (see
Chapter 5). One of the strengths that has been widely cited regarding
mobile learning is that it takes learning out of the classroom and
moves it into real contexts where learners can have access to infor-
mation or resources when they need them. Kukulska-Hulme (2015),
for example, has investigated migrant learners in Europe with their use
of an app designed to help them to cope with daily life situations in the
target language.
As was alluded to in Chapter 1, an increasingly common use of
technology outside of the classroom is the completion of some kind of
task or activity that the teacher can track progress of remotely, mean-
ing that there is no particular need for learners to actually submit
anything to the teacher, but, rather, the teacher can see if learners have
engaged in the activities by checking usage logs, such as in Moodle,
Newsela, or Quizlet. At first glance, this seems to be an extremely
126 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
efficient way of determining (and encouraging) learner engagement, as
the teacher can see quite clearly whether the learners have completed
the required tasks and activities. This often takes place in class “sets,”
meaning that the completion rates are presented to the teacher in a
way that can be imported into an LMS or other grading system
without the need to go through each of the learner records individu-
ally. At a time when teachers are constantly faced with time pressures,
this appears to be (and in some ways actually is) an extremely time-
efficient manner of carrying out homework, as it reduces the immedi-
ate need to have students submit paper-based records that can easily
be lost or confused.
The primary problem is, however, the ways in which these are
actually completed by the learners. The records provided by many
systems may be limited to just determining if something was com-
pleted, or the teacher may not place emphasis on scores but instead
just encourage learners to simply complete them so as to not pressure
them too much. This is an understandable approach, but it is often
based on the assumption that learners are at the very least putting
some effort into the completion of the activities. As Fischer (2012)
found, however, tracking learner behaviour revealed a very different
outcome from what was anticipated and expected by the teacher.
Tracking software was installed in computer laboratories where
learners of French undertook multiple-choice activities in class. The
results revealed that many of the learners were completing multiple
choice by simply clicking the answers in order, often times without
taking the time to read the texts that were provided for them. The
ultimate outcome for learners was not to learn from the activities but
to simply finish them. There was little or no connection in the minds of
these learners with actually learning from the activities; they believed
that the tasks were done satisfactorily if they merely completed them,
regardless of the manner in which this was done.
Obviously, the reasons behind teachers’ choices to use technology
for teaching and learning can also be highly complex. Not the least of
these reasons are the internal and external motivations behind tech-
nology, which can heavily impact how it is used and the longevity of
its use (Stockwell, 2013a). While, of course, there are many teachers
who see technology as a means of enhancing the teaching and learning
environment, it is not uncommon for teachers to adopt mobile tech-
nologies to keep up with trends (Hsieh & Tsai, 2017). In contrast,
teacher attitudes also mirror some learner attitudes, particularly with
regards to not seeing MALL as serious learning (Tai & Ting, 2011).
The attitudes of other players such as parents are also important in
how teachers apply technology, and the decision by teachers to avoid
6.4 Pedagogical Issues 127
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learning through mobile devices may be based on perceived negative
views of parents (Colpaert, 2010). Thus, the decisions about whether
to use mobile technologies can be influenced by a range of real and
perceived factors that may ultimately provide or deprive learners of
learning opportunities. Teachers need to understand the context but
also take care not to be overly biased by perceptions without confirm-
ing their real impact.
6.5 Summary
The complexity of the physical, psychosocial, and pedagogical issues
associated with MALL is decidedly difficult to summarise, particularly
given their mutual dependency. The physical limitations of the screen
size and input methods are also the facilitating features that makes
mobile devices mobile, but in one sense, many of the physical features
are gradually becoming less of a problem. Technological advances are
contributing to a drop in the impact of aspects such as storage cap-
acity, processor speed, battery life, and network access, but compati-
bility remains a problem between different operating systems. More
difficult to deal with, however, are the psychosocial and pedagogical
issues, which are largely related to views of mobile technologies in
social contexts and how teachers frame MALL activities, often based
on these social contexts.
One ongoing concern with mobile devices is the potential for
distractions, which may occur both inside and outside the device.
The distractions inside the device refer to notifications or other infor-
mation that pops up on the screen which may interrupt learners from
what they are doing with their device, either by causing them to cease
what they are doing to deal with the notification or by interfering with
their concentration on the task that they are currently engaged in, even
if they do not stop what they are doing. A second internal distraction
of mobile devices is their potential to interrupt with learning oppor-
tunities around the learner, where learners fail to take advantage of
these learning opportunities, such as texting or other activities that
they attempt to multitask as they listen to a lecture. The addictive
nature of the constant access to mobile devices can result in reduced
productivity and ultimately have a negative impact on learning.
Distractions which take place outside the device are dependent upon
the location in which learners decide to engage in activities, and in-
transit locations will be far more likely to be fraught with distractions
than fixed ones. How to prepare for environments with distractions is
largely the responsibility of the teacher through providing activities
and tasks that can be completed in small chunks where continuity is
128 Physical, Psychosocial and Pedagogical Issues
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
preserved even if there is an interruption. Knowing how to deal with
these distractions as they occur, however, is very much the responsi-
bility of the learner, and prevention can be as simple as planning for
appropriate locations in which to engage in mobile learning activities.
Making the most of the physical affordances of mobile technologies
is one of the key factors in maximising learning opportunities, but
equally important is ensuring that learners are aware of what they
should be doing and why, which is described more in depth in the
following chapter. If the primary objective of engaging in activities is
framed as simply completing them, it is likely that the process will not
be given adequate attention by learners, which may detract from
potential learning opportunities as well. Finally, teacher views and
learner views of mobile technologies may be misaligned, particularly
when teachers believe that learners are more enthusiastic about using
their mobile devices for learning than they really are. As will be
discussed in Chapter 7, sound pedagogical practice is based on
teachers’ and learners’ mutual understanding of what is expected of
the learners, which can only be achieved through guidance and sup-
port. The interplay between the physical, psychosocial, and peda-
gogical factors results in a need for teachers to find the right balance
in their specific context, understanding the learners and the available
technologies, and designing the correct pedagogy for achieving learn-
ing goals based on this understanding.
6.6 Discussion Questions
1. If you could make one change to the physical characteristics of a
mobile device that would make it more suitable for language
learning, what would it be? Explain your answer.
2. Imagine that you are a teacher giving a lecture, and you have
several students in class who are looking at their mobile devices
and do not seem to be concentrating. What do you do? Why?
3. How would you respond to arguments that mobile phones will
completely change language teaching pedagogy? If you agree, why?
If not, why not.
6.6 Discussion Questions 129
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
7 The Learner in MALL
7.1 Introduction
The key point of any educational context is to always keep in mind
who the learners are. The design of a course, lesson, teaching resource,
task, or activity will necessarily depend on who will use it. As has been
alluded to at several points throughout this book, learners will come
into learning situations with extremely diverse backgrounds in terms
of their skills, preferences, goals, and motivation. This is equally if not
more important when designing language learning contexts that use
technology. What experience do the learners have with using technol-
ogy for language learning? What is their perception of these technolo-
gies? How do they view their preparedness for learning with
technology? What skills do they possess from either learning or non-
learning situations that might be of assistance to them in learning?
How capable are the learners of engaging in learning activities without
constant supervision or support? These are some of the fundamental
questions that teachers and designers need answers to in order to
optimise the teaching and learning environment for their learners,
regardless of whether learning takes place predominantly face to face,
at a distance, or via self-access.
The previous chapter looked at the physical, psychosocial, and
pedagogical aspects of mobile learning, and the results of previous
studies have suggested that the pedagogical aspects are perhaps the
most influential in determining success in the use of mobile devices. Of
these, it appears that learner training is key in ensuring that learners
understand the reasons for engaging in mobile activities as well as
what is expected of them from teachers. There is evidence that suggests
providing ongoing training in technological, strategic, and peda-
gogical aspects can have a very powerful effect on the ways in which
learners view mobile learning activities and how they engage in them
(Stockwell & Hubbard, 2014). Much of the training that is currently
130
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
described in the literature indicates that the focus is primarily on the
technical aspects and that this training largely takes place only at the
beginning of a course or project. The chapter argues for ongoing
training that guides learners to develop autonomy through evaluation
of the strategies they employ and sharing their learning experiences
with others to help them reflect on their learning.
7.2 Identifying the Learner in MALL
Any discussion pertaining to learning through mobile devices must
have at its core a clear image of who the learners are. If MALL is to
meet the needs of the learners who will be engaging in it, designers
need to understand as much as possible about the backgrounds, skills,
goals, and preferences of the learners (see Levy & Stockwell, 2006). It
is logistically difficult, if not impossible, to design a one-size-fits all
MALL environment, and the stakes for engaging in mobile-based
learning activities are high, as the design of the activities will have an
enormous impact on when, how, and how long learners will spend
using them. For example, learners who only engage in mobile learning
when it is a recommended or a required part of a course will likely
have very different needs from learners that spontaneously weave
self-initiated learning through mobile devices into their everyday
schedules. One of the main features that might be considered as
distinguishing the learners in these environments is the degree of
learner agency. Based on social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986,
1991), agency is defined as the “capability of individual human beings
to make choices and to act on these choices in ways that make a
difference in their lives” (Martin, 2004, p. 135). Bandura (2001,
p. 1) suggests that this agency – human agency – is manifested in three
modes: direct personal agency, proxy agency, and collective agency.
Direct personal agency refers to an individual having direct control
over his or her own life, proxy agency relies on others to act on a
person’s behalf to achieve desired outcomes, and collective agency is
the product of socially coordinative and interdependent effort. The
parallels between the human agency that Bandura refers to and learner
agency are immediately obvious. Learner agency is defined by Dörnyei
and Kubanyiova as “learners’ proactive investment in the learning
process” (2014, p. 35) and is included in related concepts such as
learner autonomy, learner identity, action-based teaching, self-
efficacy, and self-regulatory learning. Learners who possess direct
personal agency can take responsibility for their own learning and
seek ways of doing this without relying on others, whereas learners
relying on proxy agency have a dependency on others to assist them in
7.2 Identifying the Learner in MALL 131
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
achieving their learning goals. Collective agency considers the larger
environment, and in educational situations, it may include the general
sociocultural context that brings about change in learner behaviour
and learning outcomes.
It is not difficult to see how each of these learners may behave in
contexts where mobile devices are used. Learners who spontaneously
look for ways to improve upon their language skills, such as seeking
out language learning apps, resources, social groups, and so forth,
would be considered as having direct personal agency. These learners
possess a high degree of self-regulation, and in many cases, they also
have clear goals for what they want to achieve as a part of their
learning. As described later in the chapter, they are largely autono-
mous – that is, they have both the motivation and skills required, or as
Woolfolk, Winne, and Perry put it, they have “the skill and the will to
learn” (2000, p. 384, cited in Martin, 2004, p. 135). A study by
Demouy, Jones, Kan, Kukulska-Hulme and Eardley (2015) describes
distance learners that would likely fit into this category. They were
enrolled in language courses but actively sought out extra resources on
their mobile devices that would help them with their studies. Subjects
indicated that they used their mobile phones for other daily functions,
so it seemed to be a natural extension for them to apply them to their
language learning as well.
Perhaps the most commonly researched learners are those who are
enrolled in formal language courses, but they receive support from
others (usually the teacher) to guide them to use their mobile devices
in a way that can benefit their studies. These learners would be con-
sidered as having proxy agency, in that many are largely unable to
achieve learning goals without this support. The ways in which teachers
can support learners with learning through mobile devices are varied.
The importance of the provision of sufficient training has gained con-
siderable attention over the past decade, prompted largely by work by
Hubbard (2004). This will be described in more depth in the following
section, but it is argued that learners will rarely, if ever, have the skills
they need to engage in learning activities using technology without
appropriate training (Romeo & Hubbard, 2010; Stockwell &
Hubbard, 2013). There have been some examples of the positive effects
of training on learning outcomes, such as Kondo et al.’s (2012) study of
Japanese learners of English receiving in-class training with Nintendo
DS mobile devices, resulting in improved TOEIC scores on listening and
reading. In their investigation of learners of French as a foreign lan-
guage using Duolingo on their mobile phones, García Botero, Botero
Restrepo, Chang and Questier (2019) found that learners were unlikely
132 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to engage in Duolingo tasks if they were just invited to do so, and that
learners rarely used the built-in self-regulation function of the app of
their own accord, but that engagement increased if they received
training and scaffolding, resulting in increases in test scores of French
writing. Another way is to support learners’ agency with mobile devices
is to open channels of communication between the teacher and the
learners. Tran (2018), for example, connected with her students outside
of class using a mobile-based messaging system called Line, giving them
tips for when and what to study, assisting with technical difficulties in
using online resources, and prompting informal discussions about what
to do and see around the city.
The final mode of agency raised by Bandura (2001) is collective agency.
Learners might experience this type of agency when the environment has
been shaped for learning. One example of this the MASELTOV (Mobile
Assistance for Social Inclusion and Empowerment of Immigrants with
Persuasive Learning Technologies and Social Network Services) project,
which was designed to provide language learning and cultural support for
new migrants through their mobile phones (Gaved, Jones, Kukulska-
Hulme & Scanlon, 2012; Kukulska-Hulme, Gaved, Paletta, Scanlon,
Jones & Brasher, 2015). The project was multifaceted, involving a geo-
social radar to find nearby volunteers using the GPS function, a tool for
converting text in photographs into another language called TextLens,
peer-reviewed language learning activities, a mobile navigation tool, an
ongoing profile of the learners needs, and social networking and game-
based learning functions. Through this support system, learners were able
to have access to learning that would not normally be available to them,
with the infrastructure providing the collective agency required to learn
how to function within a new environment.
Having a complete understanding of who the learners are in MALL
is complex, and the discussion here is intended to be illustrative rather
than exhaustive. Learner agency – and related concepts such as self-
regulation, autonomy, and self-efficacy – can manifest itself in differ-
ent ways in different learners at different points throughout their lives
(see Mercer, 2011). Agency is, of course, just one part of the overall
network of factors that lead to when, how, and why learners will take
the initiative for their own learning, with motivation and their belief in
their own capabilities also playing important roles (Gao, 2010). It is
highly likely that at some stage, learners will likely need assistance to
learn how to use the available tools for their language studies,
although the results of this training may not be evident until sometime
in the future. As Hubbard (2004) points out, most learners do not
possess sufficient skills to make the most of the resources that they
7.2 Identifying the Learner in MALL 133
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
have access to, and this appears to be particularly evident for those in
formal language study. Training is discussed in more detail in the
following section.
7.3 Rationale for Training
Learner training has attracted a great deal of attention in second-
language teaching and learning through technology over the past
several years, largely prompted by the seminal paper by Hubbard
(2004), who pointed out the potential of learning though technology
was largely limited by the fact that learners were not provided with
sufficient training in using technology for learning. Learner prepared-
ness with regards to technology has been a key issue at the root of the
push for learner training, with studies such as Barrette (2001) and
Winke and Goertler (2008) concluding that learners simply lacked the
skills to use the technological resources that were available. Studies
have revealed similar trends with regards to mobile learning, with
Stockwell (2008) finding that learners did not perceive their mobile
phones as learning tools despite the fact that they had access to
learning materials. It is not surprising that learner training has gained
a great deal of support as a means of preparing learners for effective
use of technology (Lai & Morrison, 2013), in light of findings that
learners often failed to complete activities as teachers expected and
simply went through the motions of doing assigned activities without a
clear understanding of what was required of them (Fischer, 2012). As
has been mentioned at several points throughout this book, teachers
frequently hold exaggerated views of their learners’ ability to use
technology for learning, yet many of the technological tools that are
provided are simply not used in the ways that teachers or designers
planned (Karlström & Lundin, 2013).
Hubbard (2013) makes a strong case for the need for learner training
with technology through arguing that there are four major misconcep-
tions that lead to beliefs that training is not necessary. The first of these
is that if technology or technology-based tasks are designed properly,
then learners will automatically be successful. While at face value this
statement seems logical, there is substantial evidence that good design
should include a training element within the technology but that this is
rarely present. The second misconception is that learners will eventually
“gravitate to the most effective uses” (p. 164). He refutes this from both
technological and non-technological research, showing that learners
frequently fail to use techniques that have been shown to optimise
learning. Thirdly, many believe that the current generation of so-called
digital natives already possesses strong skills with technology and
134 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
therefore does not require training. As Stockwell and Hubbard (2013)
and Kurek and Hauck (2014) argue, there is little evidence – if not
counter-evidence – for this, and although they may be “net savvy” for
certain purposes, these rarely correspond to learning purposes. Finally,
many believe that normalisation as described by Bax (2003) has been
achieved to the point that technology is now a “normal” part of our
daily lives, and therefore, specialised training is not necessary. Hubbard
argues, however, that only a very small number of established technolo-
gies have reached a stage of what might be referred to as normalised,
and as such, there is still very much a need for training with the majority
of technological tools, with new ones appearing at a tremendous rate.
As the foundation of his model of training, Hubbard (2004) outlines
five principles. The first of these is that teachers will better understand
their learners if they experience CALL as learners themselves. Secondly,
learners should be given teacher training, that is – they should be given
information about the underlying principles and models of learning
that teachers base their selection of activities on to help guide learners to
take responsibility for their own learning. The third principle is that
training should be provided cyclically and in small chunks rather than
in longer sessions. As learners’ understanding of their learning changes,
the same strategies and suggestions will hold a different meaning to
them, so recapping points is helpful to consolidate them. Fourthly,
learners will benefit from collaborative debriefings during which they
can have a chance to talk to one another about their experiences and
reflect on their learning behaviours. Lastly, Hubbard argues that strat-
egies should be provided for learners that go beyond the intended uses
of a technology by the developers so that they can use them to help
achieve their language goals. These principles have formed the basis for
a model of training that takes learners through different phases as they
familiarise themselves with the technologies and strategies for using
these technologies. This model will be described in what follows with
regards to its applicability to MALL.
7.4 Training, Sustained Task Engagement and Autonomy
Given that the acquisition of a second language has been inextricably
linked with sufficient exposure to the target language, it is not surpris-
ing that sustained task engagement in language learning has long been
an issue of concern to teachers and researchers, who are constantly
looking for ways to motivate learners to spend more time on language
learning tasks and activities (e.g., Busse & Walter, 2013; Deci &
Ryan, 1985; Dörnyei, Muir & Ibrahim, 2014; McGroarty, 2001;
Ushioda, 1998). The issue of motivation is covered in more detail in
7.4 Training, Sustained Task Engagement & Autonomy 135
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Chapter 5, but it is evident that sustained task engagement and motiv-
ation are intimately linked, as is learners having sufficient skills in
order to complete tasks required of them. It could be argued that there
is often confusion regarding sustained task engagement and auton-
omy, where learners are assumed to be autonomous if they engage in
activities on an extended bases outside of class time. This confusion is
in part because learner autonomy is a largely misunderstood concept,
and interpretations of autonomy vary. Some take a broader view,
such as Holec (1981), who defines autonomy as “the capacity to
take charge of one’s learning” (p. 16), while others provide far more
detail, such as Murray (2014), who operationalises it as, “learners
taking on the responsibility for goal-setting, material selection, activity
and strategy implementation, progress monitoring and outcomes
assessment” (p. 5). Both definitions give us an idea of what autonomy
is – that is, the learner being at the centre of his or her own learning –
and they also provide some hints of what it is not. Autonomy is
obviously not having learners simply engage in online tasks outside
of class time following the directions of the teacher, even if they do so
actively for extended periods of time. However, the concern is that this
kind of sustained task engagement is often mistaken for autonomy,
primarily because learners appear to exhibit many of the behaviours
that are generally associated with autonomy, such as (short-term) goal
setting, some degree of material selection, strategy implementation,
and progress monitoring.
There are numerous studies that observe these behaviours and
make claims that learners have developed autonomy based on these
observations, even though there is typically very little in the way of
follow-up studies to see whether or not learners continue to engage
in learning activities after the period of investigation is over. One of
the main points that separates this behaviour from autonomy is that
it is still dependent on external factors, such as completing course
obligations or preparing for an exam, and engagement often ceases
as soon as the pressure has been removed. It would be difficult to
claim that this is indeed autonomy in the sense that many
teachers – sometimes rather tacitly – are hoping their learners will
achieve. Furthermore, autonomy should not be treated as a constant
across cultures, where perspectives may vary depending on cultural
norms (Holliday, 2003), and behaviours may be interpreted differ-
ently based on learners’ cultural backgrounds. In some cultures,
learners are conditioned to closely follow teacher instructions, and
going beyond defined boundaries may be seen as inappropriate,
meaning that the ways in which they engage in tasks may be
impacted by their cultural norms.
136 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Task engagement itself is a complex concept, as is evidenced by
Philp and Duchesne (2016), who define engagement has consisting
of four interrelated dimensions: cognitive engagement, behavioural
engagement, emotional engagement, and social engagement. Cognitive
engagement refers to the mental effort or sustained attention in com-
pleting a task. If a learner fails to engage in a task cognitively, the
expected benefits of completing it would be considered to be minimal.
Behavioural engagement is the amount of actual time that is spent on
completing a task and is likely what is broadly held in mind when
referring to task engagement. The amount of time spent on a task is
important, but without cognitive engagement, this could well be time
that is not used effectively. Emotional engagement has multiple inter-
pretations, but it may be considered as including the degree of enthusi-
asm, interest, and enjoyment (ranging from negative to positive). They
argue that is also can refer to purposefulness, autonomy, and the
feeling of connectivity with peers. A higher degree of emotional
engagement can link to more time on task and, hence, be associated
with sustaining the time spent on the task. The last point, social
engagement, is linked to emotional engagement, but focusses more
on the collaboration between learners. This social dimension may be
nested in a dynamic social constructivist model, where “the learner(s),
the teacher, the task and the context interact with and affect each
other” (Williams & Burden, 1997, p. 46). There is evidence to suggest
that learners both seek out and benefit from being a part of a
community of learners (Murphy, 2014), and this can directly impact
upon their attitude and engagement in tasks as a result of expectations
they place on themselves compared with their peers (Yashima, 2014).
Meaningful sustained task engagement, then, is a product of these
dimensions. Emotional and social aspects can have a facilitating effect
to keep learners spending time on task, but it is not just the amount of
time but rather the quality of the time spent to ensure there is adequate
cognitive stimulation as well.
The confusion with autonomy, however, stems from expectations
that once a learner can engage in given tasks on a sustained basis –
even without prompting from the teacher – they have become autono-
mous. Inferring autonomy from isolated behaviour with one type of
learning is somewhat of a jump that is difficult to confirm. At best, this
could be referred to as task-specific autonomy and it may not neces-
sarily be a reflection of global autonomy. On the one hand, learners
with task-specific autonomy are capable of functioning within the
scope that task, including performing some of the functions that
Murray associates with autonomy such as goal setting and material
selection. On the other hand, global autonomy is closely associated
7.4 Training, Sustained Task Engagement & Autonomy 137
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
with agency. While, of course, task-specific sustained engagement is
still desirable, the aim of many teachers would be to develop their
learners’ global autonomy, where they can seek out new learning
opportunities that are not dependent upon the teacher or specific
materials or tools. One problem is that although task engagement
can be observed (e.g., Stockwell, 2010, 2019), measurement of global
autonomy is elusive. Determining whether learners are autonomous
requires longitudinal investigation in naturalist contexts, and while
surveys (e.g., Vanijdee, 2003) and short-term observation (e.g.,
Mideros & Carter, 2014) can provide insights into task-specific auton-
omy, the relationship with agency is difficult to determine through
these methods. This is not to say that knowledge of learners’ ability to
engage in tasks in a sustained manner is not valuable information for
teachers, and sustained engagement that takes place without direct
teacher intervention would be a forerunner to autonomy. Through
sustained engagement, learners start to develop behaviours that can
eventually lead them to realise that learning a language is something
that takes time. This does not necessarily mean that sustained task
engagement will necessarily lead to autonomy, but it is likely one of
the conditions necessary to achieve it.
It is very easy to have unrealistic expectations about learners’ abil-
ities to carry out assigned tasks. Particularly at higher levels of educa-
tion, teachers will often expect that learners have already developed
their own learning styles and repertoire of strategies that they are
competent in applying to the completion of the tasks they are assigned,
and that failure to do so is largely associated with a lack of the second
condition for autonomy – motivation. There are, of course, cases
where motivation is the underlying cause for a lack of engagement in
tasks, but it may also be the result of not possessing the required skills
to carry out the activities in a way that the learners may see as
beneficial. There must be sufficient time put into providing explan-
ations about precisely how to undertake activities, bearing in mind
that there will likely be a large variety of attitudes and skills possessed
by learners. Once the learners have these skills, they need time on task
to hone them, and this is where the interdependence between training,
sustainability, and autonomy becomes apparent (see Smith, 2003, for
a discussion). Cognitive engagement in tasks can be facilitated through
training in specific strategies to support learning. While some learners
may possess the underlying qualities and/or skills that allow them to
make the most of potential learning opportunities with little or no
assistance, the majority will likely require assistance over extended
periods of time where the responsibility is gradually shifted from the
teacher to the learners, and teacher guidance is slowly replaced with
138 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
more independent learner behaviour. Until learners have reached a
point where they can act independently, emotional and social dimen-
sions of task engagement can keep learners engaged in tasks for
sustained periods of time (see Lewis, 2014, for a discussion of the role
of the contribution of social aspects to the development of learner
autonomy).
The role of technology to contribute to learner autonomy or long-
term task engagement has also been somewhat overrated (Reinders &
White, 2010), and this has also been the case with MALL (e.g., Kim &
Kwon, 2012; Hsieh & Tsai, 2017). Technology in and of itself cannot
lead to increased motivation in the long term (see Stockwell, 2013a),
and it is somewhat naïve to believe that just providing technology itself
is going to lead to learner autonomy, unless there is sufficient, planned,
and ongoing training that gradually shifts the responsibility for learn-
ing away from the teacher and towards the learners themselves. While
there may be some short-term motivational benefits, there are decades
of research which have shown that it is highly unlikely that learners
will maintain their interest in continually carrying out activities after
the novelty effect has worn off (Karlström & Lundin, 2013). As with
any task or activity, learners will not continue to engage in tasks and
activities of their own volition unless they can see a link between them
and their language learning goals. In other words, mobile technologies
are useful tools for learners who are already autonomous. Rather,
responsibility needs to be gradually handed over to the learner from
the teacher through training learners to identify learning goals in the
larger learning context. They need to be aware of what they currently
know and what they need to know, and they need to acquire the skills
to achieve through evaluating potential sources of language input and
opportunities for output applying appropriate strategies to maximise
the benefits from a particular encounter. The ways in which learners
will engage with technology will depend on the individual skills,
preferences, and experiences learners have regarding the technology
(Levy & Stockwell, 2006). This includes, of course, their own mobile
devices, which they may have limited or skewed familiarity with.
Learner training has been shown to have an enormous impact on
sustainment of engagement in mobile-based language learning tasks
and the exhibition of some early signs of autonomous behaviour
(Stockwell & Hubbard, 2014; Stockwell, 2019). However, despite
the enthusiasm shown by the learners during the activities, most were
either unable or unwilling to transfer those skills to other activities that
differed from the ones that they were trained in, and many learners
even exhibited a lack of motivation after the cycle of learner training
was completed (Stockwell & Hubbard, 2018). This outcome supports
7.4 Training, Sustained Task Engagement & Autonomy 139
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the argument made by Schwienhorst (2008), who proposes that even if
autonomy is developed in one area, there is no guarantee that auton-
omy will develop in others. A potential reason for the learners’ inabil-
ity to complete other tasks autonomously in Stockwell and Hubbard’s
(2018) study could be that the learner training focussed predominantly
on providing learners with the skills that they needed to use the
materials that were assigned to them, but the learners either could
not or were not willing to transfer these skills to other tasks. Herein
lies one of the largest challenges of learner training to develop auton-
omy. On the one hand, the training needs to be specific enough that
learners can see precisely what they need to do to achieve certain task
outcomes, but on the other hand, it must include sufficiently broad
elements that enable learners to apply their skills to alternative con-
texts that may or may not be predictable. A second – perhaps equally
difficult – challenge facing teachers is raising learners’ own awareness
of the need for autonomy. As has been pointed out previously, auton-
omy and motivation are in some sense two wheels of the same cart
(e.g., Dornyei & Ushioda, 2011), where one without the other is
unlikely to lead to any sustained learning outcomes. Providing learners
with the skills that they need to become autonomous without simul-
taneously nurturing their motivation to learn is akin to putting them
into a cart with one missing wheel and simply hoping that somehow
they will still be able to reach their destination with one axle dragging
in the dust.
Recent developments in technology have seen attempts to develop
software that simulates the role of the teacher (e.g., Lai, Shum & Tian,
2016). Technology that has been designed for learning purposes has an
instructional designed embedded within it, and this instructional design
is intended to resemble the presence of a teacher in some shape or form
through providing feedback, guidance, or encouragement to make the
most of potential learning opportunities. Unless learners are gradually
pushed into making decisions about what and how to capitalise upon
these opportunities without assistance, it is questionable whether it can
be claimed that they have truly been able to achieve autonomy. In
MALL, technology aims to enable learners to take advantage of real-
world situations through “just-in-time” learning, prompting them to
use the target language authentically (e.g., Conole & Paredes, 2018).
While there are indeed possibilities in this area, care still needs to be
taken to ensure that the dependence on the presence of the teacher
hasn’t simply been replaced by dependence on technology, where there
is no training to wean learners off this dependency.
Systematic methods of providing learner training have been rare,
with one of the most comprehensive models being proposed by Romeo
140 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
and Hubbard (2010), founded on the original ideas of Hubbard’s
(2004) learner training framework. The model is integrated into a
course such that learners are familiarised with the technologies that
are to be used, strategies for using these technologies for language
learning, and a foundational knowledge of the theories underlying
these strategies. The model is described in the following section.
7.5 A Model of Training in MALL
As Hubbard (2004) points out, training is often a forgotten aspect of
using technology for teaching and learning. The “digital natives” myth
often prompts teachers into believing that younger learners are
brought up in an environment where they are surrounded by technolo-
gies and therefore do not need training to use them. Research has
suggested that this is not necessarily the case (see Stockwell &
Hubbard, 2013), and there is little correlation between use of technol-
ogy for private uses and effective use of technology for educational
uses. The learners themselves also may not share this confidence in
their abilities, and there is evidence that learners indeed desire more
training in how to use their mobile devices effectively for learning (e.g.,
Rashid, Cunningham, Watson & Howard, 2018; Stockwell, 2008;
Yang, 2012), adding weight to the argument in favour of providing
learner training to all learners, regardless of their apparent skills
with technology.
The three steps that are included in Hubbard’s model are technical,
strategic, and pedagogical training (Hubbard, 2004, 2013; Romeo &
Hubbard, 2010; Stockwell & Hubbard, 2014). Each of these steps has
an important role in ensuring that learners are familiar with the using
the technology and should be carried out in an ongoing and cyclical
manner. A central part of the model is that it also includes debriefing
sessions, where learners and the teacher have an opportunity to dis-
cuss what learners did with the technology to support their learning, to
get ideas from other students about appropriate strategies, and to
further their own understanding of their own strategies through
explaining them to others. This accords with Lewis’s (2014) view of
the need for the social aspect of developing autonomy, and it also
enables learners to have a sense of support. Each of the steps is
described briefly in the following sections.
7.5.1 Technical Training
At the time that Hubbard’s (2004) paper was written, he lamented the
fact that there was very little information in published articles about
7.5 A Model of Training in MALL 141
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
how, when, and where this training was carried out, leading to the
assumption that either the training did not exist or it was not seen as
having sufficient impact on the learning process to be included as an
element of the research described. The training that was most com-
monly described in the literature tended to be of a technical nature,
and the primary focus is to familiarise learners with the functions of
the tools that they were using. These technologies were generic in
nature – such as an online dictionary, a word processor, or social
networking software – or were dedicated for language learning – such
as in-house or commercially developed software. For example, Romeo
and Hubbard (2010) trained learners in how to use functions of
Windows Media Player that enabled them to change the playback
speed, a feature that most of the learners were not aware of despite
playing videos through this tool on countless occasions. In the same
light, it should not be taken for granted that learners know how to use
the generic – let alone the dedicated – apps or software on mobile
devices, or even the various functions of learners’ own devices.
Learners who are used to only using search engines may not know
how to do something as apparently straightforward as typing a URL
into a mobile browser (from my own experience!). Introducing and
explaining how to use apps such as audio players that allow for
changing the playback speed or book readers that have built in dic-
tionaries are other examples of mobile-based tools that can assist
learners if only they know how to use them.
7.5.2 Strategic Training
Research has suggested that learners who apply various strategies to
their language learning experiences are more likely to be successful
(Chamot, 2005), but learners are often not provided sufficient instruc-
tion in learning strategies for learning specific language skills and
areas. Despite being one of the largest predictors for success in learn-
ing a second language (Ellis, 2015), the strategies employed by learners
are often skewed towards certain skills such as vocabulary, with little
focus on areas that learners are specifically targeting to improve such
as listening and speaking. Moreover, learners are unlikely to revise or
evaluate their own learning strategies and will often continue to apply
the strategies that they started using from previous language learning
experiences. Strategy training through technology does not need to
vary greatly from non-technological means, but the specific techniques
for how to use a particular technology to employ these strategies need
to be taught to learners. General learning principles in the form of
strategies will likely be useful, but if learners do not know how to use
142 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the technologies that they are expected to use to carry out these
strategies, there is the danger that they will not be able to do this
properly.
There have been several studies that explore the provision of strat-
egies as a means of preparing learners to use various technologies (see
Lai & Morrison, 2013) and have found these to have a positive impact
on engagement in learning activities and on learning outcomes. It
follows that teaching strategies to use mobile devices for language will
also likely have an impact on the ways in which learners will use them
for learning. Kim (2017), for instance, found that learners of English
in South Korea who were given strategies for English listening to help
them engage in a dedicated MALL application were able to outper-
form learners on post-treatment listening tests compared with learners
who did not receive this strategy training. Given potential time con-
straints for the provision of strategies in face-to-face environments,
other methods have also appeared; for example, Tran (2018) provided
strategies for using Quizlet to her Japanese learners of English outside
of class using Line, and Lai, Shum and Tian (2016) used an online
training program to provide learners with strategies that would help
them to select and use technologies to support their language learning.
Both studies reported increased participation in available resources
along with positive feedback, reinforcing the view that learners them-
selves came to understand the benefits of strategy training in language
learning through mobile devices.
7.5.3 Pedagogical Training
The third step of the learner training model is pedagogical training,
where learners not only employ strategies as a part of their teaching
and learning, but also evaluate and teach others the strategies that they
use. The ability to teach specific strategies suggests a higher level of
processing and understanding of the strategies, entailing an under-
standing of the not only the “how” aspect but also the “why” of using
them. Learning through teaching is not a new concept, and there is
already research that suggests that learners can affirm their own
learning through teaching others (e.g., Cortese, 2005), as well as
reflect on their own learning processes (Travers, Morisano & Locke,
2015). Romeo and Hubbard (2010) refer to pedagogical training in
CALL as giving learners teacher training; that is, they are not just
trained in how do use strategies, but also why, so that “informed
choices can be made by an individual learner in the same way as a
professionally prepared teacher would be making them for a class”
(p. 217). Pedagogical training has been seen in CALL research, such as
7.5 A Model of Training in MALL 143
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
O’Bryan (2008), who taught her students to use a multimedia gloss
tool; she taught her learners – overseas students enrolled in degree
programs in US universities – not only what strategies would help
them, but also why the glosses were designed to contribute to their
learning. While pedagogical training is yet to be pervasive in MALL,
there are some examples starting to emerge. Tran (2016), for example,
attempted to provide strategic and pedagogical training for her
Vietnamese learners of English using Facebook, instructing them on
not only how to use Quizlet but also the pedagogy behind the different
strategies that she asked them to perform. While learners responded
positively to the training, there was little evidence that there was a
significant change in behaviour as a result of it.
The three steps of training presented in the model developed by
Hubbard depend on their being reinforced on an ongoing and recur-
rent manner due to the impact that they can have on one another. The
foundational understanding of the technology is a prerequisite for the
use of strategies, and understanding why these strategies can contrib-
ute to learning is likely to have a positive impact on their sustained
usage. Through the debriefings with other learners, learners can recon-
sider their strategies and even decide to try out new ones that they
hadn’t considered previously, even if they knew about them before-
hand. Employing new strategies may be dependent upon understand-
ing the technical features of the technology that were not previously
necessary for the strategies that they were using, meaning that they
need further training with the technology. In this way, training needs
to be an integrated part of a course, with time given on a planned and
consistent basis. In the absence of longitudinal studies to explore this,
whether the holistic training presented in this model will lead to
autonomy or not remains to be seen, but preliminary evidence from
Stockwell and Hubbard (2014) suggests that sustained interaction is
indeed possible. As described earlier, sustained interaction might be
considered as a forerunner to autonomy, providing them with at least
some of the necessary skills to self-regulate their learning. This gives
learners the skill that they require for agency, and as their needs
change and the will arises, it is likely that autonomous behaviour
will emerge.
From the Field: Incorporating Training in MALL
I remember when I first introduced systematic learner training into my
classroom environment. Training had always been a part of my teaching,
but training that took up a significant part of each of my classes on a
144 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
week-by-week basis was somewhat daunting from the outset. Following work
by Romeo and Hubbard (2010), debriefings were included in the class for the
learners to discuss what they had done with their mobile devices outside of
class time and to evaluate and rethink their strategies for their learning and
for me to provide further information about possible strategies that the
learners might be able to use. My biggest concern was that these debriefing
sessions took up about twenty to thirty minutes of a ninety-minute class, and
that this might have a detrimental impact on the learners’ performance.
Ultimately, my fears proved to be unwarranted, and I found that there was
significant improvement in the result of weekly quizzes and participation in
class. Furthermore, when the semester ended, several learners took the
time to ask me for more resources that they could apply the strategies that
they had learned in class during the semester break. The environment in the
classes with the strategy training was very different from previous years, and
perhaps one of the deciding features was that learners could see that the
teacher was concerned about individual learners, but at the same time, they
realised that the ultimate responsibility for learning was on the learners
themselves. They came to understand that mobile devices were only as
effective as the strategies that they used with these devices. I’ve used
learner training in each of my classes since that first attempt several years
back, and although there is some variation between classes and cohorts, it is
unmistakable that learner training makes an enormous difference to the
classroom environment, the attitudes towards learning with mobile and
non-mobile devices, and the relationship between the learners and
the teacher.
7.6 Summary
The learners in MALL may take the form of those who are undertak-
ing study of a language of their own volition for personal or voca-
tional purposes, those who are in a course of formal study that
requires them to learn a language, those who find themselves in an
environment where they must learn the language in order to survive on
a day-to-day basis, or indeed any combination of these. Different
learners will possess varying degrees of agency, and some will be
equipped to carry out behaviours that are associated with their learn-
ing without support, and others will require some kind of support at
the individual or infrastructural level. The type of agency learners
possess has a direct impact on the ways in they seek out and use the
available resources and contributes to the ways in which they will
engage with them. Agency also plays a role in the ways that learners
7.6 Summary 145
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
use mobile devices as a part of their learning. Learners with a higher
degree of agency are likely to be more willing to proactively make use
of the resources that their mobile devices give them access to, and as
such, have more opportunities for exposure to and use of the target
language. Agency can be supported by external factors, and with
assistance learners can become more capable of making decisions
and acting upon those decisions for learning.
A key factor leading to such behaviour is training, where learners
can be shown specifically how mobile technologies can facilitate their
learning, and over time learners become able to evaluate and even
teach the strategies that they use. Sustained engagement in language
learning tasks and activities over time can impact positively upon their
beliefs and attitudes towards language learning, and learner engage-
ment can evolve from being predominantly behavioural to emotional,
with a higher degree of purposefulness (Philp & Duchesne, 2016).
Sustained engagement in learning tasks can give learners a greater
degree of familiar with what is effective, and this can cause them to
engage more cognitively and make more effective use of the time spent
on task. Therefore, training can lead to sustained interaction, which
can, in turn, lead learners to consider their own learning processes and
practices. However, it should not be assumed that providing training
targeting specific a language skill (i.e., reading, writing, listening, or
speaking) or language area (i.e., vocabulary, pronunciation, grammar,
etc.) will be sufficient to lead learners to become globally autonomous
learners. There will likely be imbalance in what they are and are not
able to do, which limits their ability to take responsibility for own
learning in a holistic sense. However, part of training should be to help
the learners to achieve direct personal agency, where even if they do
not know what strategies are appropriate for targeting a particular
language skill or area, they will at least be able to take the initiative to
try to find out.
Learner training should be ongoing and cyclical, where the ultimate
goal is to hand responsibility for learning completely over to the
learners themselves to become globally autonomous with regards to
language learning. How to provide this training continues to be elu-
sive, but it needs to include a balance of supporting both skills and
motivation. Skills training needs to teach learners about appropriate
learning strategies, but also needs to teach learners to view these
strategies with a critical eye, understanding the principles behind
them. Teaching learjersto take advantage of available resources
through mobile devices must necessarily be a part of this training.
Motivation is a complex construct of internal and external factors that
are dependent upon short- and long-term goals, their skills with using
146 The Learner in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
resources including mobile technologies, and the social dynamics of
the learning context. The pedagogy behind learner training is still in a
period of flux as teachers try to find the optimum combination of
teaching content and skills for learners to be independent, but this
should not happen at the expense of sufficient support for learners
who need direction. A pertinent question is raised by Fisher, Evans
and Esch (2004), who ask, “Where on the continuum between fully
directed tasks and complete learner autonomy does good practice lie?”
(p. 57). Giving too little or too much control to learners depending on
their state of development can have a detrimental effect on the learning
process, meaning that good practice in learner training will need to be
fluid, adapting to the evolving needs of the learners. Whatever form
learner training takes, it must be part of a larger picture of instruction
that ultimately has an end to it, where the learners not only take
responsibility for their own learning in the present, but do so with
an eye on further developing their skills in the future.
7.7 Discussion Questions
1. Is it possible to determine whether or not a learner is achieved
autonomy in their language learning? Why or why not? Is it pos-
sible to measure autonomy? If so, how?
2. What type of engagement do you think that teachers expect in their
learners for language learning tasks? Is this being clearly conveyed
to learners? Give reasons for your answers.
3. What barriers do you see in introducing the training model pro-
posed by Romeo and Hubbard? How can these barriers be
overcome?
7.7 Discussion Questions 147
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
8 Designing MALL Environments
8.1 Introduction
Design is so central to language teaching that it is easy to forget how
much of our time is dedicated to it, ranging from designing syllabi,
lesson plans, learning materials, and tasks, through to designing the
layout of the classroom, the roles and interplay of in-class and out-of-
class activities, homework, and assessment. In this way, teachers are
very much designing an intricate learning environment, often within
the constraints of a larger curriculum, technological resources, admin-
istrative workload, research objectives, and even funding. Designing a
teaching and learning environment that includes technology needs to
be founded on having a clear idea of the entire context, including
understanding who the learners are and what their needs and skills
are, but it also means knowing what technological resources and
support infrastructure is in place, how to train both teachers and
learners, and how to deal with technical problems as they arise.
Design is not limited to language teachers, of course, and it can be
viewed from the perspective of researchers, institutions, and even
language learners, each of which has their own individual priorities
and agendas. The scope of design in CALL is evident in the research
which has been dedicated to it. Levy and Stockwell (2006), for
example, point out that design in CALL can include language learning
tasks that target one or more specific language skills and areas, but it
can also include the design of CALL artefacts such as tutors and tools.
In addition, design can refer to designing research, and this often
entails learners engaging in activities to achieve research goals (see
Chapter 4) or for the development of theories (see Chapter 5) (see
Rodríguez, 2017, for an overview of design-based research and how it
relates to theory).
Needless to say, design has also been a key issue in mobile learning.
This may be from the most elemental levels that include software and
148
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
hardware (Pachler, Bachmair & Cook, 2010), but more recent per-
spectives of MALL consider design principles which coalesce the
complex network of in-class and out-of-class social and cognitive
interactions that make up learners’ daily lives (Kukulska-Hulme, Lee
& Norris, 2017; Pegrum, 2019). MALL can provide a rewarding
learning experience that brings language learning opportunities closer
to the learners – whether in class or as they go about their everyday
business – but the difficulties lie in how to design learning environ-
ments that can create these opportunities. There have been a number
of attempts to conceptualise what is necessary to make MALL effect-
ive (e.g., Sharples, 2013; Stockwell & Hubbard, 2013), and the points
raised in these discussions have the potential to raise awareness of
some of the key issues involved in using mobile devices in language
teaching and learning. At the same time, there have also been criti-
cisms of MALL for its lack of creativity in pedagogy (e.g., Burston,
2015), but the field is developing rapidly with innovations in design
that help to make MALL a useful experience for learners, and even an
integrated part of their lives (Gu, Gu & Laffey, 2011).
Design in MALL should be comprised of three distinct but inter-
related elements: design of the learning environment, design of the
artefacts, and design of the tasks that learners will engage in. The
learning environment refers to the larger context in which learning
takes place. It is extremely complex, both broad and yet localised at
the same time, consisting of social, interactional, and institutional
elements that are intertwined with both the space (the larger environ-
ment) and place (the immediately surroundings) of the learners
(Luckin, 2010). Artefacts are, as described in Chapter 2, the objects
that learners interact with, and may refer to both the hardware and the
software that are used in learning. At the same time, interaction with
artefacts is inseparably linked to the environment in which it occurs
(Dourish, 2004), meaning that the design of artefacts must take place
with a clear understanding of the context in which they are to be used.
One of the foundations of artefact design is human-computer inter-
action (HCI). Approaches to HCI stipulate that designers need to
know who the users are and when and how they will use the artefact
to create an interface that can facilitate smooth interaction between
the technology and the user (Tidwell, Brewer & Valencia, 2020).
Finally, language learning tasks will dictate what learners will do with
the technology to develop their second language skills. While the
definition of tasks has evolved somewhat over the years, they should
be meaning-centred, modifiable and flexible, include a gap which
needs to be addressed, require learners to use their own language
resources, and have a clearly-defined end to it (Ellis, Skehan, Li,
8.1 Introduction 149
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Shintani & Lambert, 2020). The role that mobile technologies has in
facilitating language learning tasks can be defined – to a certain degree
at least – by the design of the artefacts that are used, whether the
interactions take place with the artefact (i.e., learners interacting with
the technology) or through the artefact (i.e., learners interacting
with other humans using the technology). The affordances of the
devices that are used will also contribute to shaping the tasks that
are carried out with them, which adds weight to the interdependency
of the relationship artefacts, the devices, and ultimately, the overall
learning environment, which includes the individual characteristics of
the learners. Each of these three areas – learning environment, arte-
facts, and tasks – has a rich foundation in research and theory and
have been applied widely to teaching and learning with technology.
Their applicability to MALL is described in turn below.
8.2 Designing Learning Environments
Understanding the overall environment is the first step in deciding the
role that technology will play and the tasks that should be selected and
is dependent upon a clear idea of how the instruction will be designed
and the skills that teachers and learners require. How the environment
will be designed will depend upon the format that it takes, that is, how
the learners interact with the content, the artefacts, the teacher, and/or
other learners. Some possible environments may be face-to-face,
blended, and distance learning (Stockwell & Tanaka-Ellis, 2012),
and each may occur as a part of the others or in conjunction with
them. For example, face-to-face environments may be a type of
blended learning where technologies are used as a part of a course
during class or for tasks and activities to be completed outside of class.
They may also be a component of distance learning, where classes of
students may be required to come together for a few days or weeks of
the year enabling teachers and learners to meet one another in person.
It is possible to consider the applicability of mobile technologies in
each of these environments. In face-to-face environments, learners may
use their devices in class, either each using their own individual device
or with multiple learners looking at a single device together. This type of
environment can promote collaboration between learners, which is
an aspect of MALL which has gained attention over the past several
years (Kukulska-Hulme & Shield, 2008; Kukulska-Hulme & Lee,
2020). Blended learning has been plagued by unclear definitions
(VanDerLinden, 2014), and a conclusion as to what blended learning
actually consists of has been very much open to interpretation. A useful
definition is “the thoughtful fusion of face-to-face and online learning
150 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
experiences . . . [where] face-to-face oral communication and online
written communication are optimally integrated such that the strengths
of each are blended into a unique learning experience congruent with
the context and intended educational purpose” (Garrison & Vaughan,
2008, p. 5). Despite the written focus, this definition serves to show that
technology in blended learning should be used in a meaningful manner
that takes advantage of the affordances of the technology and considers
how it can be used as a part of the larger environment. This underlying
perspective of blended learning agrees squarely with Laurillard’s (2012)
observation that technology implementation needs to be based on
understanding the principles of what good teaching are and assigning
appropriate roles to technology based on this. It follows that regardless
of what environment a technology is to be used in, the first and foremost
consideration is how the technology can be used to achieve solid and
identifiable learning goals. Distance learning has undergone a complete
transformation over the past two decades or so as a result of technol-
ogy, changing from posting of paper-based materials to electronic ones,
and the position of mobile technologies as a way of keeping learners
and teachers in communication with one another has become a central
one (Sharples, 2014). Mobile technologies can be shaped to fit into most
learning environments provided an appropriate design is implemented,
as described below.
8.2.1 The ADDIE Approach
Designing of learning environments has largely been the domain of
instructional design (ID). There have been several models of ID that
have appeared over the years (Richey, Klein & Tracey, 2011), but one
of the most influential instructional systems design frameworks is the
ADDIE approach (Schegel, 1995; Tamez, 2016). ADDIE is based on
the “Five-step approach” which was originally developed by the US
military in the 1970s and as such does not have any identifiable
starting point as an approach in its own right. ADDIE is made up of
five phases (Analyse, Design, Development, Implementation, and
Evaluation) each of which informs the next phase, and it is typically
used cyclically where each iteration allows designers to systematically
modify the environment based on empirical outcomes. It has been the
foundation of several approaches to instructional design since it
appeared, including ASSURE (Shelly, Cashman, Gunter & Gunter,
2006), the Kemp model (Kemp & Smellie, 1994; Morrison, Ross &
Kemp, 2004), and the Dick and Carey model (Dick, Carey & Carey,
2005), each sharing very similar core concepts. Approaches like
ADDIE and its various offshoots allow course designers to understand
8.2 Designing Learning Environments 151
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the phases of creating a learning environment, and their broad nature
makes them applicable to different contexts that need not follow the
linear modes of design that has made them the target of criticism over
the years (Branch, 2009). ADDIE is not specific to technology integra-
tion per se, but it is amenable to adaptation to include technology and
can also be applied to language teaching and learning with technology
such as courseware design (see Colpaert, 2006, for an overview). It is
important to note that ADDIE is not a learning model (Woodill, 2015)
but rather a reiterative framework for design. As such, it does not have
a specific theory of learning or technology embedded in it, and design-
ers approach their individual environments with their own under-
standing of how languages are acquired and the affordances of the
various technologies that are available in that environment.
The ADDIE approach illustrates the complexities involved in under-
standing how the intricate elements of designing a learning environ-
ment fit together through the five interrelated phases. According to
Branch (2009), in the Analyse phase, designers must determine what
the instructional goals are to be, typically through identifying a per-
formance gap, that is, an aspect of the learners’ proficiency that needs
improvement. In the analyse phase, it is also necessary to determine
what technologies are available and specifically who the target audi-
ence will be. In MALL, this would mean ascertaining what mobile
devices are owned and how they might fit together with other techno-
logical and non-technological resources that are available and under-
standing what support mechanisms are in place. Once the target aspect
has been finalised, next is the Design phase. This entails conducting a
task inventory, composing performance objectives, generate testing
strategies, and calculate the return on investment. The design phase
allows guidelines to be devised to stipulate precisely what tasks will be
required to achieve the goals laid out in the previous phase, how much
time and effort is to be dedicated to development, and how the
effectiveness of these tasks will be evaluated. Where mobile technolo-
gies are to be used, this entails selecting the types of tasks to be used
and deciding which of these will be available on mobile devices. It is
during the Development phase that the actual content is generated
along with the supporting media, which would include the creation of
the learning artefacts. As part of the development phase, frameworks
for learner and teacher guidance should be devised, and where pos-
sible the artefacts should be piloted to allow for revisions. According
to the ADDIE approach, it is only after the artefacts have been suc-
cessfully created and the learner and teacher training procedures have
been established that the Implementation phase begins. As the name
suggests, this is where the artefacts are used in the actual environment
152 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
for which they were designed, and it is the culmination of the previous
phases to ensure that the tasks and artefacts are suited to the learning
goals and the users are competent in carrying these out. The final
phase, Evaluation is where the quality of the processes and products
are confirmed. Appropriate evaluation criteria are essential in achiev-
ing this with the appropriate tools, and the outcomes of the evaluation
should be applied to the next iteration of the ADDIE approach where
any gaps that were not adequately filled or any newly identified
performance gaps can be addressed.
8.2.2 The Ecology of Resources Model
A completely different perspective of the design of the learning environ-
ment stems from Vygotskyan views of learning. The Ecology of
Resources model was proposed by Luckin (2010) as a means of looking
“beyond the single user, single system, single location paradigm”
(p. 75). The motivation behind the Ecology of Resources model was
to model a learner’s interactions both in and out of school and with
various other participants in order to support the development of
technology to link formal learning experiences to students’ lives outside
of school. Luckin’s concept is logically compatible with MALL in that
she views technology as being one of the resources that are a part of a
learner’s ecology that can allow for provision of resources or facilitate
interaction with others. At the heart of the Ecology of Resources model
is a reinterpretation of Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Development
(ZPD) where learners engage in scaffolded instructional interactions
with others who possess a level of knowledge or skills that learners need
in order to achieve a certain learning goal (“More Able Partners”). In
Luckin’s model, the ZPD sits at the core of what she terms the Zone of
Collaboration, which is “full of potential forms of assistance that might
act as resources to facilitate learning” (p. 29). She also adds two new
constructs, the Zone of Proximal Adjustment (ZPA) and the Zone of
Available Assistance (ZAA), which form consecutively larger rings
around the ZPD. The larger ZAA includes the variety of resources that
learners can access for assistance when required, and the ZPA refers to
those resources that are appropriate to the learner’s needs. As a design
model, the Luckin’s model has three phases:
Phase 1. Identify and organise the forms of assistance around the
learners that are potential resources for learning (the Ecology of
Resources) in the following seven steps.
1. Brainstorm the potential resources in an Ecology of Resources
2. Specify the focus of attention of the learning environment
8.2 Designing Learning Environments 153
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
3. Categorise the resource elements
4. Identify barriers (filters) to access to resources
5. Identify the learners’ own resources (skills, experiences, etc.)
6. Identify potential “More Able Partners”
7. Repeat the first six steps
Phase 2. Examine the interrelationships between the resource
elements from the first phase and determine how they meet the
learners’ needs or can be optimised for individual learners. She
identifies four types of relationships:
1. Influence relationships (how one element influences another)
2. Component relationships (whether one element is a part of
another)
3. Typology relationships (whether one element is a type of another)
4. Social relationships (between family members, friends, or commu-
nities, etc.)
Phase 3. Develop the necessary scaffolds and adjustments for creating an
appropriate ZPA for each learner. Luckin offers seven types of
scaffolding and adjustment:
1. Interaction between the learner and resource elements
2. Interaction between the learner and More Able Partners
3. More Able Partner interaction for the learner’s optimal use of
resources
4. Interaction between resource elements
5. Interaction between the filters to resource usage
6. Interaction within a resource element
7. Interaction within a filter to resource usage
One of the primary distinguishing factors between the Ecology of
Resources model and models of instructional design is that it focuses
primarily on the resources that are already available to the learner
and does not explicitly deal with design of artefacts or tasks them-
selves. These are tacitly embedded in the phases outlined in the
design model (design of artefacts could be included as a part of
Phase 1 and 2, and the design of tasks could be a part of Phase 3),
but the main objective of the model is to limit the barriers and
maximise the support from the “More Able Partners” so that the
available resources around the learner can be used to maximum effect.
The concept of fitting identifying all potential formal and informal
learning resources – technological and human – and assisting the
learner to gradually be able to use them independently has extremely
important implications for MALL. In an era where the resources that
154 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learners have access to extend beyond just those that are provided for
them by teachers, it is essential that designers have a clear idea of what
learners may potentially use and seek methods through which learners
may receive guidance to using them appropriately.
8.2.3 Conversational Framework
While some of the existing instructional and educational models give a
broad overview of any learning environment (such as the ADDIE
approach), others stipulate how technology fits into the overall educa-
tional environment. One such example is Laurillard’s Conversational
Framework (2002, 2012). Laurillard explores how teaching itself may
form the foundation of design, and has been one of the most influential
frameworks of considering how technology may be used purposefully
in education. The core emphasis of her framework is on learning in
formal contexts, and she takes great care to ensure that all of the
potential factors that may impact learning are given due consideration,
including the workplace, educational theorists, the teacher, and even
the educational establishment itself. Laurillard views teaching and
learning as the complex intersection between teacher factors and
learner factors, but these are seen within the learning environment
itself, particularly in view of the course aims, teaching activities and
assessment, intended learning outcomes, and logistical factors, and
how these align with learner motivations, expectations, knowledge,
skills, needs, and personal goals to produce the actual learning out-
comes. Misalignments between intended and actual learning outcomes
can then be investigated and resolved through reviewing the learning
goals, the teaching activities, and assessment. Laurillard (2012)
includes various other teaching principles in order to meet the
expected learning goals, namely, monitoring alternative conceptions,
using scaffold theory-based practice, fostering conceptual knowledge
development, and encouraging meta-cognition. What is particularly
interesting about Laurillard’s view is how she explores the ways in
which technology can be used in varied views towards teaching,
including learning through acquisition, through inquiry, through dis-
cussion, through practice, and through collaboration. Applied to
mobile learning, the Conversational Framework sees mobile devices
as a means of communication between the teacher and learners and
provision of site-specific practice are of particular relevance
(Laurillard, 2007; Woodill, 2015). As a framework for learning envir-
onment design, the merit of the Conversational Framework is that it
requires teachers to be aware of the complete range of factors in the
context and to understand that there may be mismatches between
8.2 Designing Learning Environments 155
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
teacher and learner perspectives and outcomes, and suggests
approaches in which to achieve the desired learning outcomes.
At the same time, it also advocates the use of well-defined teaching
principles to which mobile and other technologies should be applied
purposefully.
8.2.4 The iPAC Framework
A framework which has been developed specifically for designing a
mobile learning environment is the iPAC framework. It includes three
main categories – personalisation, authenticity, and collaboration –
that focus on the affordances of mobile devices in education and the
use of time-space (Kearney, Schuck, Burden & Aubusson, 2012;
Burden & Kearney, 2018). Personalisation includes what Kearney
and colleagues term as “agency” and “customisation,” where agency
is the extent to which learners can control when, where, and how
they learn with mobile devices and the degree of autonomy that they
have in doing this, and customisation is the degree to which learners
can choose the tools and activities that they engage in to suit their
individual needs. Agency is primarily an internal construct that
develops as a result of individual factors and external support (see
Chapter 7), but customisation will be heavily dependent upon the
affordances of the tools and activities that are available. That is to
say, even if a learner has agency, they may be limited in their
capability to customise their learning experience due to a lack of
appropriate resources. Authenticity links to the context in which
mobile learning experiences are made real and meaningful through
the environment in which they occur and is similar to the concept
of situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991), and task refers to
how realistic the tools and activities replicate those that would even-
tually be expected of learners in the real world. Collaboration
includes conversation between peers, teachers, and “other experts”
(Kearney, Burke & Schuck, 2019, p. 753) and co-creation, which
refers to the creation of digital content collaboratively and sharing of
information, data, and artefacts with others. Finally, the “time” in
time-space relates to the freedom in time that mobile devices afford
users (cf. Traxler, 2007), whereas “space” can mean both physical
and non-physical or “virtual” spaces that learners may use to engage
in learning or interact with others. The interrelationship of these
factors gel together clearly to show how a learning environment
may be designed in such a way as to make the most of the affor-
dances of mobile devices.
156 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
8.2.5 Other Design Frameworks
There are numerous other frameworks or models of design that may
be applicable. One instructional design model that has been applied
especially to include technology (but not specifically mobile devices) is
the RASE learning design framework (Churchill, 2013; Churchill, Fox
& King, 2016). RASE (Resources-Activity-Support-Evaluation) is
founded on the idea that resources themselves are insufficient for
learners to achieve desired outcomes sufficiently, and there is a need
to supplement them with suitable activities that lead learners to engage
in using the available resources through active experience, provide the
learners with support that enables them to work independently or with
others to solve learning problems, and include an evaluation step
where both teachers and learners can be informed of learner progress
in achieving the learning outcomes. The RASE learning design frame-
work is comprised of technology being used in each of the four
elements, with resources including the various digital artefacts and
learning objects, activities describing how these resources can be used,
support exploring how technology may facilitate support from
teachers, peers, and/or external parties, and evaluation considering
how technology may be used to measure student learning and partici-
pation. Mobile technologies can also be applied to the RASE frame-
work in terms of the interactivity of mobile devices to facilitate
communication for ongoing support and their mobility to provide
resources that are immediately relevant for activities carried out in
authentic contexts. The RASE framework does not provide specific
information about teaching or learning processes per se, but rather, it
enables designers to see how technologies may be used in different
aspects of the teaching and learning process, and as such has value in
giving a global perspective of technology in the learning environment.
Other examples include Sharples, Taylor and Vavoula’s (2007)
activity system of mobile learning or Dennen and Hao’s (2014) M-
COPE framework. Both of these have a specific focus on mobile
learning and may be applied to designing the learning environment
but are related to other existing models. The activity system of mobile
learning is based solidly on Laurillard’s Conversational Framework
(2012) but considers specifically the affordances of mobile devices and
how they may be applied to learning within an activity theory frame-
work. The M-COPE framework was designed to work in conjunction
with the ADDIE approach considering the mobile affordances, condi-
tions, outcomes, pedagogy, and ethics (which make up the acronym
M-COPE) of mobile devices to inform the design process. The design
of the overall environment is the first major step in determining what is
8.2 Designing Learning Environments 157
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
done by teachers, learners, and other supporters of the learning pro-
cess, but the strength of this design is highly dependent upon the tools
and resources which are used, which are described below.
8.3 Designing Artefacts
It would be impractical to try to recount all the current body of work
that looks at design of resources for language teaching and learning in
the limited space that is available here. There is some necessary over-
lap between theories and models that are used in the larger environ-
ment and those that are used for designing artefacts. One theory that is
of particular relevance to mobile learning is situated learning. Used as
the foundation for a number of the design frameworks described in the
previous section, situated learning was conceived by Lave and Wenger
(1995) and advocates that learning needs to take place through social
interaction in the location in which skills and knowledge will be used,
much as an apprentice might when learning a trade. If learners are
connected to a real context and carrying out interactions with others
who can provide them with the skills and knowledge that they need,
they are more likely to have a practical sense of how these can be
applied. Knowledge is situated within the environment in which it is
acquired and is “in part a product of the activity, context, and culture
in which it is developed and used” (Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989,
p. 32). It is not surprising that situated learning has been applied
to mobile learning and, more specifically, to MALL. Mobile devices
can be carried to the locations that they are required, and information
that is needed to complete a communication act can be accessed easily.
Furthermore, learning can be enhanced through communities of
practice, which is another aspect that can be supported through
mobile devices given the social and networking affordances that
mobile devices not only make possible, but also enable to be accessible
to learners in real situations. One criticism situated learning has
faced is that learners in authentic environments may have difficulty
in focussing their attention on the learning goals that designers
may expect of them. However, as Little, Dam and Legenhausen
(2017) contend, learners are constantly learning something when
they are in such situations, but it might be simply something different
from what the teacher intended them to learn. Acquiring skills and
knowledge that learners need – even if it differs from teacher expect-
ations of learner needs – is an important part of the learning process,
provided that teachers can monitor learner progress to ensure that
they are not deficient in any aspects that they are required to be able
to function.
158 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Studies based on situated learning as a design principle seek to take
advantage of the mobility and communication aspects that mobile
devices afford in artefact design. For example, Huang, Yang,
Chiang and Su (2016) developed a mobile app that provided outdoor
learning activities for young Taiwanese learners of English based on
their location, which was determined through the GPS function on
their devices. Learners were then able to engage in practice dialogues
with their peers based on the contextualised activities and were
reported to have shown improvement in their vocabulary as well as
enhanced motivation to study English. In another study, Wong, King,
Chai and Liu (2016) describe the development of an artefact called
MyCLOUD, which was designed for learners of Chinese in Singapore.
The system consisted of three main components: a mobile dictionary
that learners could use to keep a record of new vocabulary that they
encountered; a digitised version of their textbook, which enabled the
text to be played audio using text-to-speech technology; and a social
space for learners to post and interact with other learners’ media.
Learners could post pictures from their daily lives through the social
space and comment on these and posts made by other learners, keep-
ing a record of unfamiliar vocabulary that arose. Their results sug-
gested that learners exhibited a broader range of vocabulary usage at
the end of the thirteen-month study compared with the beginning, and
this could at least be partially attributable to the MyCLOUD system
that they used to contextualise new vocabulary that they encountered.
Other models and theories look at the way that the technology can
facilitate learning through the specific affordances that technology
provide. One such model is dual coding theory, which is a cognitive
psychology theory that explores how access to information through
both the auditory/verbal and visual/pictorial modes impacts a learner’s
cognitive processes to facilitate learning (Mayer, 2005; Sweller, van
Merrienboer & Paas, 1998). An example of this is provided by Li and
Yu (2017), who used dual coding in the design of their learning artefacts
for Taiwanese learners of English – in this case, multimedia message
service (MMS) messages that were sent to learners’ mobile phones at 7
a.m. and 5 p.m., when the learners were likely at home. The messages
consisted of text only; text and picture; text and sound; and text,
picture, and sound in order to explore the effect of multiple modes on
learner retention. Li and Yu found that there was enhanced retention if
multiple modes were used in presenting new vocabulary, but there were
not significant differences between the each of the modes. The purpose
of using mobile devices in this study was to allow learners the flexibility
to look at the messages at a time and place that suited them and to take
advantage of the multimedia capabilities of the devices.
8.3 Designing Artefacts 159
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Another concept from cognitive psychology that has been applied to
MALL design is spaced learning, which is founded on the notion that
reviewing newly learned information within a relatively short time
spans can enhance long-term retention of this knowledge (see
Godwin-Jones, 2010, for a discussion). Spaced learning has formed
the foundation of the design of commercial mobile-based artefacts
such as Duolingo that have been used within a language learning
environment (e.g., Loewen, Crowther, Isbell & Kim, 2019), but it
can also be used to design a learning context that uses mobile devices,
such as in the work of Cavus and Ibrahim (2009), who designed an
SMS mail-out program called MOLT (MObile Learning Tool) for
Turkish learners of English. The MOLT system was designed to send
messages at timed intervals to cyclically remind them of new vocabu-
lary on an ongoing basis. In order to bring in-class activities into
learners’ everyday lives, the timing of the messages was chosen so that
the learners were outside of class, and there was evidence that learners
had indeed acquired many of the vocabulary items that were taught
through the system.
Psychometrics is another field that has contributed to design of
MALL artefacts. Item response theory (IRT) was developed in the
1950s as a means of predicting the probability of getting an answer
to a test item correct based on the difficulty of the item and the ability
of the test taker, where test takers of higher ability will have a better
chance of correctly answering more difficult test items (Baker & Kim,
2017). IRT has formed the foundation for computer-adaptive testing
and has also been used in CALL (e.g., Browne & Culligan, 2008). For
mobile devices, Chen and Chung (2008) developed a sophisticated
vocabulary learning system based on IRT design principles for
Taiwanese learners of English which learners used on PDAs provided
by the researchers. The system enabled the designers to provide
vocabulary activities that were tailored to the learners’ needs and to
develop a profile of each learner through which their progress could
be monitored.
As these examples illustrate, design of artefacts is also an extremely
complex process, and appropriate design is dependent upon the the-
oretical approaches that are selected (see Chapter 5). Needless to say,
the design of language learning artefacts must take place with a clear
view of the overall environment and an understanding of when,
where, and how these artefacts will be used. There are countless
artefacts on the market now for language learning on mobile devices,
and the overwhelming majority of these take the form of apps. While
I have intentionally avoided providing lists of available apps for
language learning as they are inclined to become dated extremely
160 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
quickly, I will mention a few of the more enduring apps here. As
described before, Duolingo (www.duolingo.com) is a commercial
app for developing vocabulary, listening, and speaking through grad-
ually introducing new content and testing the user as they progress (see
Teske, 2017, for a review). Another commonly used app is Busuu
(www.busuu.com), which includes an extra element on provision of
content where learners can link up with others through the app,
allowing them to interact through text or audio (Winans, 2020).
Quizlet (www.quizlet.com, described later in the chapter) is a flash-
card app that enables learners to produce their own lists of vocabu-
lary. A useful list of mobile learning apps and an overview of learner
attitudes towards them provided by Rosell-Aguilar (2018); he the list
into self-study language apps, translation apps, news apps in the target
language, flashcard apps, and other apps such as Facebook, Twitter,
Skype, and YouTube; this is a useful guide when looking at possible
alternatives.
8.4 Designing Tasks
The design of tasks is one of the most central aspects of language
teaching and learning in formal environments. Any discussion of
teaching practice should not be separated too much from the views
of what language is and the ways in which it is taught, and the design
of learning activities will be based on the view of language and the
underlying assumptions about how languages are learned (cf.
Richards & Rodgers, 2014). These views can be very broad in their
focus, coming from as varied perspectives as cognitive-interactionalist,
psycholinguistic, sociocultural, psychological, and educational (Ellis
et al., 2020). Van Lier explores the relationship between underlying
theories and the associated practices, as is described in Table 8.1.
Examples from MALL research which have been designed based on
these assumptions and/or practices are also provided.
An information processing view of model can be seen in a study
investigating information gap tasks on mobile phones. In one example
by Kiernan and Aizawa (2004), learners sent the information required
to complete worksheets to one another using the text messaging
function on their phones, and in another example, Razaee, Alavi and
Razzaghifard (2019) used information gap activities as a way of
facilitating interactions between learners in order to measure whether
mobile-based interactions could lead to enhanced oral proficiency.
The main goal in each case is that language is used as a tool in order
to exchange information which facilitates interaction between the
participants.
8.4 Designing Tasks 161
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 8.1 Underlying views of learning and associated practices
(adapted from van Lier, 2002, p. 142).
Assumptions
View of
Language and/or
Learning Practices
Examples from
MALL
Language use is
information
exchange,
consisting of
inputs and
outputs
The conduit
metaphor;
sender-receiver
model;
information
processing
Information gap
tasks
Kiernan and
Aizawa (2004),
Rezaee, Alavi
and
Rhazzaghifard
(2019)
Language
learning means
acquiring
competence
Language as
acquired habit;
language as
internal,
mental
competence
Memorising lists
of words;
sentence
practice
Browne and
Culligan (2008),
Heo, Lim and
Kim (2010),
Nguyen and
Pham (2011)
Language
consists of
form and
meaning
Structural,
generative
linguistics;
speech act
theory,
functionalism
Focus on form(s);
consciousness
raising;
content-based
teaching
Reinders and Cho
(2010), Chen
and Chang
(2011)
Language
consists of
pronunciation,
vocabulary,
grammar, and
meaning as
building
blocks
Descriptive
linguistics
Skills-building
exercises;
practice in all
skills areas,
moving
between
smaller to
larger items or
vice versa
Cui and Bull
(2005), Chen
and Chung
(2008)
Language use
can be correct
or incorrect,
standard or
non-standard
Normative
linguistics
Error correction;
formal essay
structure;
accent
reduction;
standard tests
Ghorbani and
Ebadi (2019), Li
and
Hegelheimer
(2013)
Early cognitive
science;
contrastive
linguistics;
behaviorism
Languages
compete with
one another in
our brain for
attention and
storage
Avoidance of use
of the first
language;
arguments
against
bilingual
education
Tabatabaei and
Goojani (2012),
Lai (2016),
Tran (2016)
162 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
With regards to a view of language learning as acquiring compe-
tence, vocabulary learning has long been a part of learning through
mobile devices, and activities that focus on the use of memorising lists
of words are quite common, such as flashcards (Browne & Culligan,
2008) or other more sophisticated systems that provide activities
based on system estimates of learner abilities (e.g., Stockwell, 2010).
Similarly, activities that target grammar are also relatively common,
either through giving learners opportunities to write short passages
such as blogs (Heo, Lim & Kim, 2010) or through intelligent systems
that utilise adaptive modelling (Nguyen & Pham, 2011). Indeed, both
vocabulary and grammar have been amongst the most commonly
targeted language areas through technology since the early days of
CALL (see Stockwell, 2007, for a discussion), and this trend has been
repeated to some degree through mobile devices as well.
One study that looked at focus on form through mobile devices was
carried out by Reinders and Cho (2010), in which learners used an
audiobook that they could listen to on their mobile phones; the
volume was raised slightly on specific targeted forms to increase their
salience. In another study looking more at the retention of content,
Chen and Chang (2011) compared learners who were provided access
to content either through audio only or through a combination of
audio and text. They found that learners who had both modes
retained the content better than those who just had the audio and that
lower-proficiency learners who had access to both audio and text
were more likely to rely on the text to facilitate comprehension of
the content.
Skills-building exercises, where practice typically targets easier items
initially and gradually leads learners to more difficult items, have been
greatly assisted by technologies that can adapt to individual learners.
As has been seen in CALL more generally, there has been a strong
trend towards vocabulary in MALL (Lin & Lin, 2019). This is obvious
in numerous studies where various personalised adaptive systems
based on algorithms such as item response theory (e.g., Chen &
Chung, 2008) or through responses to activities (e.g., Cui & Bull,
2005) have been described in the literature. Other studies include
pronunciation and grammar; for example, Wang (2017) explored
the prospect of using WeChat as a tool to develop English pronunci-
ation in Chinese learners, and Moghari and Marandi (2017) explored
texting as means of developing Iranian learners’ grammatical skills.
Thus, descriptive linguistics views of language based on the assump-
tion that incremental instruction assists learners in developing the
building blocks of language can also be seen as the foundation of
studies using mobile devices.
8.4 Designing Tasks 163
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Regarding the correct use of language, the most typical focus of
research in MALL has been on grammar. Ghorbani and Ebadi (2019),
for example, explored the impact of feedback by instructors through
the mobile-based messenger app Telegram on the grammatical accur-
acy of learners of English in Iran, finding that learners showed
improvements in accuracy when instructors provided them with cor-
rective feedback while chatting online. In another study, Li and
Hegelheimer (2013) found that, when learners used a mobile app for
grammar, they were more likely to engage in self-editing of texts in
academic writing. The emphasis on the accuracy of language in both
of these studies reflects a normative linguistics view of learning.
One of the more common ways of encouraging learners to commu-
nicate in the target language has been the use of CMC, which includes
tools such as email or chat (e.g., Stockwell & Harrington, 2003). On
mobile devices, text messaging has been the most commonly used
method (e.g., Kim, 2011; Tabatabaei & Goojani, 2012), but more
recent studies have used social networking tools such as Facebook
(Tran, 2016) and Twitter (Kim & Lim, 2010), as well as communi-
cation tools such as WhatsApp (Lai, 2016) and Line (Tran, 2018).
While CMC does not preclude the use of the L1, depending on the task
design, it can be discouraged or even forbidden. Early cognitive studies
which investigate interaction using CMC or social media have, how-
ever, tended to move away from strict enforcement of the L2, and
other aspects such as participation and presence in communities of
inquiry (CoI) have been the focus of an increasing body of research
(e.g., Fornara & Lomicka, 2019; Tran, 2018).
The discussion here does not make judgements about which – if
any – of these assumptions are more appropriate for language learning
than any others, as there is sufficient evidence an extremely broad
body of research completed over the years from that all have the
potential to bring some positive (and some potentially negative)
impacts on language learning. The reason for listing them here is to
allow practitioners to reflect on what their own assumptions may be,
and that these assumptions are unlikely to be the only possible
assumptions that they may hold. The range of approaches applied
and the respective results from the studies described here shows that
the view of teaching and learning held by teachers is equally reflected
in tasks and activities designed for mobile devices as they were likely to
be carried out in more traditional non-technological environments.
What this means is that the technology does not necessarily funda-
mentally alter practice, but, rather, the affordances of the mobile
devices being used may be applied so that teachers may adapt their
practices in innovative ways.
164 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
8.5 Designing Assessment in MALL
The appropriateness of using mobile devices for assessment purposes
is a point that is understandably receiving more attention as they
become more central in education. It makes sense that if learners are
going to be required to use their devices for learning purposes, there
should be some parallels with their assessment as well. As assessment
procedures developed, there has been a move away from assessment
that is based predominantly on memorisation of facts and figures to
“open-book” methods where learners have access to reference mater-
ials and resources during testing as a more reliable way of determining
deeper learner understanding (Eilertsen & Valdermo, 2000). Research
has indicated that open-book testing is comparable to closed-book in
terms of reliability and is not perceived as “easier” by test takers
(Heijne-Penninga, Kuks, Schonrock-Adema, Snijders & Cohen-
Schotanus, 2008). An extension of this has been the concept of
“open-book–open-web” (OBOW) where examinees are able to refer
to any resources – both offline and online – in order to complete their
assessment (Cortese, Pupovac & Xu, 2019). Given Dikkers’s (2014)
prediction of the need for change in assessment in mobile learning,
how to make the most of devices that learners are carrying out a
significant part of their learning will become increasingly relevant as
mobile devices are used more widely in both formal and informal
learning contexts.
In saying this, assessment through mobile devices is not without
concern. As much as there are issues of reliability if test takers are able
to freely access any information or interact with anyone as they
undergo assessment, questions arise as to the sophistication of test
responses if mobile devices are to be used as the medium for carrying
out the assessment. An ongoing concern of assessment with mobile
devices is, however, security concerns and making sure that the person
who is taking the test is the one that should actually be taking it. One
method that has been proposed includes the use of biometric authen-
tication such as facial recognition (Kawahara, 2010; Kawahara,
Nogimori & Matsumoto, 2015). As a completely online university,
students enrolled at the researchers’ institution are required to take
exams externally, meaning that there is a need to confirm the identity
of the user. Using facial recognition, they are able to identify the user
to ensure that the test taker is the person who is actually enrolled in the
course. Assessment through mobile devices, and particularly in
MALL, is still an emerging area at the time of writing, and challenges
in designing effective and reliable assessment will likely be difficult to
resolve.
8.5 Designing Assessment in MALL 165
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
8.6 Principles for MALL Design
The chapter provides a list of nine interrelated suggestions for mobile
learning, supported by relevant findings from the recent literature, and
can act as a practical checklist for those who are considering using
mobile devices in their teaching and learning contexts.
8.6.1 Understanding the Context
Before engaging in any type of project using mobile devices, the
point of departure must be having a sufficient understanding of
the various intertwined elements that make up the context. This
includes knowing who the learners are, their skills, preferences, learn-
ing styles, and habits (Levy & Stockwell, 2006). When mobile devices
are included in the equation, it also means knowing what devices are
owned and learner willingness to engage in activities using them, as
there is a difference between knowing (i.e., being aware of ) the idio-
syncrasies of the context and understanding (i.e., realising the impact)
that these may have on the selection of appropriate learning tasks
and activities.
8.6.2 Becoming Familiar with Available Resources
There are numerous examples of resources that can be used on mobile
devices and computers for language learning. I will not attempt to
present a list of resources for learning here, as there is a constantly
evolving and dynamic range of apps (see earlier in this chapter) and
websites available to teachers and learners. In saying this, however,
designers need to have some grasp of what is available and their
applicability to their own context. As described earlier, MALL is far
more than apps (see Chapter 1), but a look at any of the online app
stores will quickly reveal that an enormous number of apps for lan-
guage learning have been released over the past several years. Some of
these are available completely free, but the majority provide either a
free trial or free access to a limited number of materials with which
learners can engage to determine whether or not it is worthwhile in
paying for the full version. The quality of these apps is by no means
uniform; some are produced by larger, well-known companies and/or
organisations, and others are produced by smaller developers or indi-
viduals. However, the size of the organisation that developed the app
is often not a very good indicator of the quality of the product itself, at
least in terms of the content, despite a rather more impressive interface
usually being associated with the more established companies.
166 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
There are also some apps which are completely commercial or
offered as a part of a class or school or school licensing arrangement.
Students may have limited access to the resources that are provided by
these companies and may even be able to take out an individual
subscription to be able to use the software, but the main targets are
typically institutional sales. These materials often have both a
computer-based interface and a mobile interface, adjusting to the
device used by learners. Mobile activities are often designed in such
a way that they can be completed easily using mobile devices in short
chunks to facilitate atomised learning. One example of this is the
learning site Newsela (www.newsela.com), which provides activities
based on short videos of news segments. Students can use these in a
limited capacity for free, but they will not have full access to the
complete range of activities unless they have a subscription. Not only
does the subscription give students full access to the materials, but it
also gives teachers access to records of student activity on the site,
which would allow it to be used for assessment purposes, should the
teacher so desire. A similar model is the quiz and flashcard program
Quizlet. Students can have access to all learning resources for free, and
there are both computer-based and mobile interfaces,; the content can
be designed by teachers and/or students themselves, or they can access
content that has been developed by others. A primary difference is that
the content is designed on a voluntary basis by others with no guaran-
tee of quality. If they pay for a yearly subscription, teachers can create
trackable class groups, enabling them to have some record of student
activity with Quizlet, which can be used for assessment or other
purposes as necessary.
8.6.3 Making the Most of the Affordances of the Device
As described in Chapter 6, modern mobile devices have functionalities
that make them very attractive tools for learning. It would be unreal-
istic to expect that mobile phones are the best choice to undertake all
types of learning activities, and it is becoming apparent that there are
some tasks and activities to which mobile devices are naturally more
suited. A further consideration with affordances is that even if tools
and apps are designed with mobile and PC versions, there is often a
discrepancy between these two versions that can cause frustrations for
learners, most notably a lack of functionality in the mobile app com-
pared with web-based resources accessible by computers (Tran, 2019).
While technological affordances may restrict some of the possibilities
of what can be done with mobile devices, in many cases, good design
can allow for the inclusion of multimedia, interactivity, and portability
8.6 Principles for MALL Design 167
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
appropriately. The affordances of mobile devices – such as their
portability and their technical functions including cameras, music
and video players, GPS, Internet browsing, and so forth (see
Chapter 2) – do allow for an enormous range of possibilities that
should persuade learners that there are clear benefits in using these
devices for engaging in tasks and activities or language learning.
8.6.4 Setting Feasible Learning Goals Suitable for Mobile
Devices
While the affordances of mobile devices make it possible to carry out
learning in a way that promotes interactivity and multimodality, they
also have limiting factors associated with the physical limitations of
the device and the environment. As mentioned in Chapter 6, screen
size, input methods, battery life, and network access can all have a
restrictive impact on what can be done through mobile devices. On the
one hand, mobility allows users to engage learning at times and in
places that are suitable for them, but on the other hand, it means that
these locations may not necessarily be ideal for concentrating on tasks.
While MALL can, of course, be feasibly carried out in fixed locations
like the classroom, the library, or at home, learning through mobile
devices in noisier public spaces brings with it challenges of outside
interferences that will likely cause starts and stops in activity. This has
implications for design of both the tasks and the artefacts for MALL,
and understanding the difficulties associated with the affordances of
both the device and the environment is essential (see Stockwell &
Hubbard, 2013; see also Chapter 9). Goal setting – both short and
long term – needs to bear in mind the role that mobile devices fit in the
larger picture with offline and other online learning.
8.6.5 Predicting Technical Problems and Preparing Support
Learning with mobile devices is something that can and does take place
both inside and outside of the classroom. Technical difficulties are, to a
certain extent, to be expected when using technology, and it is essential
to ensure that there is either (a) a backup plan to deal with any problems
that arise, or (b) means of immediately supporting problems that occur,
rather than trying to deal with them after they actually occur. When
problems occur outside of the classroom, it is natural that providing
support is far more complex and can cause learners to have a very
negative image of learning through mobile devices, leading to greatly
reduced motivation, or even attrition. Ironically, mobile devices are
168 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
often cited as being an ideal support for learning (e.g., Järvelä, Näykki,
Laru & Luokkanen, 2007; Ng & Nicholas, 2013), but descriptions of
the support for mobile devices themselves are rarely made explicit. One
observation is that teacher presence in online courses plays an import-
ant role in maintaining student engagement (Gunawardena et al., 2016;
Stone & Springer, 2019). The key is not only to offer support but to
prepare in advance exactly how this support can be given in a timely
and accessible manner.
8.6.6 Preparing Learners Adequately
As has been alluded to at several points throughout this book, learners
cannot be expected to engage in effective learning with technology
without being sufficiently trained (Laurillard, 2002). Training is some-
thing that necessarily must be carried out in an ongoing and perhaps
cyclical manner, where learners have multiple opportunities to deter-
mine what they do and do not know how to do. As is described in
Chapter 7, training learners must go beyond just simply showing how
to use a technology to ensure that learners know what to do to learn
specific elements of language through the technology and, more import-
antly, what to do when they encounter difficulties. As has been found in
a number of studies, learners are far more capable of engaging in self-
directed learning using mobile devices outside of class when they are
given sufficient training (Kondo et al., 2012; Stockwell & Hubbard,
2014). Thus, preparing for using mobile technologies goes beyond
making sure learners understand the technology; they also need to
know how to use the technology for learning in the context in which
they find themselves with an understanding of their individual needs.
8.6.7 Allowing for Alternatives
There are two possible interpretations of alternatives here. The first
means providing tasks and activities that will run suitably on a wide
range of devices, and are not dependent on the sophistication of the
device (i.e., older smart phone models vs. the latest models) or operat-
ing system (iOS, Android, Windows Phone, etc.). The second inter-
pretation considers that, given there will be some learners who do not
wish to engage in mobile learning, it is necessary to provide alterna-
tives for learners (i.e., desktop computer, paper-based, etc.) that allow
them to make choices about what is best for them depending on their
individual learning preferences and their circumstances at that time.
Some learners simply may not have access to the same level of sophis-
tication of technologies of their peers (see Chapter 1), and this could
8.6 Principles for MALL Design 169
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
result in a reluctance to use outdated devices, while others may come
in to learning environments with clear ideas on how they wish to learn,
and this may entail not using mobile devices. Rather than forcing
learners to use tools that they do not feel comfortable with, ideally,
it is best to show them the benefits – and potential limitations – of the
available tools (see Section 8.6.2), and let them choose for themselves
at a time that is right for them. Provision of appropriate guidance may
contribute to a change in their views, but the final decision of what
tools to use should be left to the learners themselves.
8.6.8 Understanding the Impact of Non-learning Uses
The concept of knowing how learners use various technologies for
non-learning purposes as a means of tapping into the skills that they
have already acquired with the technologies is certainly not new, and
there has been discussion of this for some years (see Levy & Stockwell,
2006). While it is true that learner engagement can be enhanced in this
way (Steel, 2012), it is also helpful to note what learner expectations
are with various apps (particularly relevant for app design), which can
provide insights as to why and how learners behave using various
tools that are available to them. An example of this is the apparent
lack of participation in online learning communities, but when con-
sidering the high proportion of “lurkers” in Facebook, who are satis-
fied with just browsing the content of others without contributing, it is
possible to understand why such similar trends are evident in learning
contexts. It follows, then, that if learners are expected to participate in
similar fora as they might in an SNS like Facebook, their instinctive
behaviour will resemble their non-learning uses, meaning that active
posting would be considered as an “unnatural” way of using a tool
that they are familiar with, which could result in resistance to or even
rejection of the tool. As a result, understanding learners’ regular non-
learning uses may contribute to understanding learner usage patterns
as well as provide insight about how to frame activities in a way that
learners are more likely to follow behaviour expected by the teacher.
8.6.9 Dealing with Distractions
Distractions inside and outside mobile devices are described in
Chapter 6, but both of these can have a severe negative impact on
learning in that there is a great time loss caused by the shift in attention
towards the new task and the time spent in trying to return attention
to the original task. Part of this includes learners’ trying to find where
they left off and reorganise ideas to be able to resume the task
170 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
(Stockwell & Hubbard, 2013). Some partially formed ideas may be
easily forgotten, and time might be spent on trying to remember these
ideas. If the impact of struggling to resume the original task after the
distraction becomes too great, it may even result in the learners giving
up on what they were doing and abandoning the task altogether.
Should learners be in an environment where distractions are inevit-
able, as is often the case with mobile learning (Traxler, 2007), it is
possible to take some measures in order to minimise the potential waste
of time and effort. Firstly, it is useful to leave some kind of markers to
make it easier to know what has been done and how to continue. In a
mobile context, this could be difficult, particularly if the distractions are
unanticipated and there is little time beforehand to deal with them. This
can be alleviated in part with the design of the learning resources
themselves, either by providing activities that can be completed in
microsegments and will automatically provide some indication of what
the next step is (see Stockwell & Hubbard, 2013) or by enabling an
automatic save function that can also give some hints to what has been
done and how this can be continued, even if continuing on a different
device. This type of function already exists in cloud-based products
such as Dropbox and other tools that are designed for collaboration,
providing sufficient information that someone can come in cold and still
be able to determine what has been done with minimal effort.
8.6.10 Opening Channels of Communication
Reducing the barriers between teachers and learners has long been
thought of as a means of promoting more active learning and of
encouraging learners to take risks in the classroom. With the range
of communication tools that are available, it may seem that greater
communication between teachers and learners would be considered as
natural but effective communication would be thought to depend on
more than simply having the tools through which to carry out this
communication. Showing a receptive attitude towards learner needs in
face-to-face events, and then applying this to electronic communica-
tion tools, could be thought of as a good way to encourage learners to
benefit from the teacher’s experiences and knowledge to create a
learning environment more conducive to active learning.
8.6.11 Experiencing MALL as a Learner
The point of experiencing learning through technology as a learner
was initially raised by Hubbard (2004), who argued that the only way
to really see what difficulties that learners experience is to actually sit
8.6 Principles for MALL Design 171
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
in the place of learners and undertake tasks as a learner. There is a lot
to be said in favour of this behaviour, namely that it is easier to know
exactly what types of problems may arise and what types of support
are necessary to deal with them. Only when teachers and researchers
have put themselves in the place of learners will they have a greater
understanding of learner needs which can lead to a better learning
experience.
8.7 Summary
As has been described in this chapter, design is an extremely complex
and yet central part of any teaching and learning context, and this is
perhaps even more the case when mobile technologies form a part of
this context. The design of the learning environment means that
teachers and course developers need to start from an overall perspec-
tive of the entire context and then see how this relates to actual
practice that sees technologies as having a central role. Design needs
to include both the artefacts themselves as well as the ways in which
these artefacts are used in language learning tasks and activities that
have been based on clear learning outcomes, and a process by which
the intended and actual learning outcomes can be compared and any
discrepancies can be resolved should be a part of the overall design.
Mobile technologies should take advantage of the affordances of the
devices that enable learners to interact with their surroundings, but
should do this in a way that has sustainable pedagogical goals in mind.
8.8 Discussion Questions
1. Imagine you have been asked to advise colleagues who are introdu-
cing MALL into their learning context. What steps would you
recommend they take to design their environment and tasks?
What would you ask them to exercise caution with and why?
2. Try to find three MALL apps or resources and examine them for
the underlying views of learning. What assumptions and practices
are used? Do the assumptions and the practices match? Explain
your answer.
3. Mobile-based communication means that it is possible for teachers
and learners to be in constant contact with one another. What
potential problems are there with this?
172 Designing MALL Environments
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
9 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges
in MALL
9.1 Introduction
This chapter brings together the arguments covered in the previous
eight chapters and looks specifically at the three main areas that are
mentioned in the title of this book – concepts, contexts, and challenges
in MALL. Although this is the final chapter in this book, I have
intentionally decided not to call it the “conclusion,” as the term
conclusion gives an image of completion. MALL has come a long
way in the two decades since it emerged, but it is still very much in
its infancy as an academic discipline, and as a result, much of what we
will come to understand about MALL is in the future and not in the
past. It is in this vein that I deal with the concepts, contexts, and
challenges that need to be developed for the field to move ahead.
Needless to say, the notions which have been dealt with in this book
are complex, and many have not been given the attention that they
could have been given, due to space limitations and the sheer amount
of research which has been carried out. Part of the rationale behind
this chapter is to offer alternative perspectives of MALL so that it may
be seen from a broader perspective. For example, how could mobility
be viewed to make it more applicable to a learner’s life? Could a
different perspective lead us to design our learning environments
differently? The same may be said of interactivity and agency, both
of which have been shaped by a sociomaterial shift that continues to
take place as mobile technologies evolve.
We have seen different viewpoints of MALL co-emerging in parallel
in varying contexts, the most obvious of which being the distinction
between learning in formal and informal contexts. There is, however,
a definite blurring of the division between these, and this is also
contributing to a shift in the way that we think of both, including
the delivery of content, interaction between the players in the environ-
ment, and the products and processes of assessment. Undertaking
173
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
research in this increasingly complex environment is proving to be
fraught with multifarious problems, and as learning becomes inter-
twined with learners’ everyday lives, it becomes progressively difficult
to disentangle learning episodes from non-learning ones, and, indeed,
the question needs to be asked as to whether we really need to.
Learning as a part of a person’s life would be considered as a desirable
outcome, and as such, separating learning experiences from their daily
experiences would result in an artificial view of their engagement with
the target language. It has also become more apparent that teaching is
undergoing a transformation that is just as radical as learning. The
teacher experience is a very different one compared to as little as a
decade or two ago with the integration of technology into all aspects
of teaching and learning (see Chapter 2), but this is undergoing yet
another fundamental shift as mobile technologies move the range of
educational opportunities into something that is more pervasive and
yet more personal. These challenges are likely to affect all teachers,
whether or not they themselves actively use MALL in their educational
environments. These broader categories of concepts, contexts, and
challenges are described in more depth in what follows, but it should
be pointed out that each is interconnected with the other two. New
concepts entail both new contexts and challenges, just as new contexts
and challenges each give rise to new concepts, and new challenges
force us to formulate new concepts and reconsider the contexts in
which MALL takes place. This chapter aims to show the interrelated-
ness of these issues, prompt further discussion, provide a springboard
for further deliberation and research, offers alternative perspectives on
themes that have been covered previously, and relates them to practice
in the present and foreseeable future.
9.2 Concepts in MALL
9.2.1 Lifelong Mobility
Given the centrality of the “mobility” aspect of mobile learning, it is
natural to highlight it as the first concept to consider in MALL. As has
been discussed in Chapter 1, mobility encompasses using personal
mobile devices to learn across “multiple contexts, through social and
content interactions” (Crompton, 2013, p. 4). Pegrum (2019) expands
on this view of mobility in his 3 Mobilities Framework, which encom-
passes three different levels of interaction: mobile devices, mobile
learners, and mobile learning experiences. At the first level, the
learners are using mobile devices, but they themselves are not mobile.
At the second level, the learners are using these mobile devices outside
174 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
of the classroom to enter “centralised digital learning spaces to access
materials and engage in tasks, perhaps together with their geographic-
ally scattered peers” (p. 105). Finally, at the third level, the learners
engage in learning experiences through interacting with real-world
objects and people through their mobile devices. This distinction is
an extremely interesting one in that it sheds light on the complexity of
what mobile learning actually is. Early research focussed almost exclu-
sively on the first level, with experimental research taking place in
classroom settings that was intended to determine the effectiveness of
MALL (see Chapter 4). We are now seeing an increasing amount of
research and practice that explores these next two levels of Pegrum’s
framework; however, a persistent problem is how to assist learners to
extend their learning experiences into these next levels and to success-
fully function within them.
The affordances of mobile devices no doubt make them suitable
to the diversification of the mobility of learning spaces and experi-
ences. Indeed, the almost-clichéd expression “anytime, anywhere
learning” – which from the outset has served as the catchphrase of
mobile learning – focusses on mobility. While it is true that mobile
devices do indeed give learners enormous freedom to choose the
“anytime” and the “anywhere” in their learning, how mobile can
we really expect the learning experiences in the daily lives of aver-
age learners to be without some kind of intervention? As appealing
as the catchphrase sounds, the reality is that learners need to have
“sometime” and “someplace” in which to complete required tasks,
and these need to be budgeted for within their busy lifestyles
(Brown & Green, 2003). Learners who are immersed in environ-
ments with abundant opportunities for learning may well take
advantage of them, but this depends on the predisposition and
agency of the learner, access to tools and resources, and skills to
use the tools effectively. Just as a hammer and saw will have a very
different meaning to a master carpenter than to a novice, a mobile
device in the hands of someone who is both aware of the almost
overwhelming range of resources available and also skilled in using
them will likely have a far greater chance of engaging in meaningful
“mobile learning” than someone who is not. A fundamental prob-
lem is that many learners in both formal and informal language
learning contexts see mobile devices as little more than a means of
accessing information and carrying out activities through (usually
freely available but all-too-often relatively uncreative) apps.
Although this behaviour entails the use of mobile devices, it would
be difficult to consider it as being beyond Pegrum’s first or second
level of mobility.
9.2 Concepts in MALL 175
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
As such, it is evident that mobility is a product of not only the
affordances of learners’ devices, but also the skills of the learners
themselves and their teachers, peers, and mentors who are a part of
the ecology of the educational environment in which learners find
themselves. Some learners may possess the skills required to make
the most of the existing opportunities in their context without inter-
vention, but for the most part – and particularly learners who are in
predominantly monolingual formal learning contexts – will have diffi-
culty in implementing “mobility” beyond the most fundamental level.
It is precisely these learners that we need to make aware of the tools
and resources that are available. There is more than enough evidence
to suggest that many teachers are not confident in providing learners
with the training or support to use mobile technologies for learning
purposes (see Chapter 3), but teachers should be competent in encour-
aging learners to make the most of any and all available resources
through understanding and reflecting upon the learning process
(Travers, Morisano & Locke, 2015), whether mobile or otherwise.
This is where support from others in the larger learning environment
can help learners to develop new skills, through using their networks
of peers or mentors to deepen their command of effective use of mobile
devices for language learning (Luckin, 2010). Through open commu-
nication between teachers and learners, the information can be passed
back and forth between each other, and teachers can have access to
new ideas that they had not considered themselves. Although learners
may struggle to understand what resources are available and learn
how to use them appropriately, the hurdle that will be even harder to
overcome is to help them to understand how these resources are
relevant to them not only in the short term but also after the period
of formal study has finished.
This leads us to an important aspect that could be included in the
definition of mobility – lifelong mobility – where learner interaction
with resources throughout their lives can be supported through mobile
devices. This does not refer only to the integration of mobile technolo-
gies into a learner’s daily routine at a particular point in time but,
rather, to the issue of how learners can use their mobile devices in a
way that evolves with their long-term individual needs. This is an
aspect of MALL which has received very little attention (Lyddon,
2016), although it is tacitly at the core of much of the discussion into
the development of learner agency (see Chapter 7). Mobile devices
(and particularly mobile phones) have become an indispensable part
of a person’s life, with many people owning their first mobile phone
and/or tablet in their teens, after which time they will upgrade or
update their devices constantly for the rest of their lives. Average
176 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
ownership of a mobile phone is two years (Dunn, 2017), but make it is
relatively easy for people to transfer their data and apps from one
smartphone or tablet to the next throughout their lives, providing
them with a good degree of continuity. That means that users of
mobile devices such as smartphones will often have access to these
resources for decades unless they have a particular reason to delete it
or if there are incompatibility issues.
Given this lifelong ownership, it is possible to see how learners’
mobile devices can be enduring educational companions. As learners
progress with their studies, they may advance from being predomin-
antly language learners into language users (see Blaj-Ward, 2017),
where their focus shifts from how to learn the language to how to
use it effectively in real contexts. In the mix of changes that continually
take place in their lives, one of the only constants may be their
ownership of personal mobile devices. Resources that were essential
as learning tools to language learners may be indispensable reference
resources to them as language users, although their dependence on
these resources will vary depending on the personal, educational, and
career paths that they choose to follow. Even after extended breaks,
learners may find that they return to resources that they used at an
earlier point in their formal or informal language studies. This lifelong
mobility of MALL is one that needs to be capitalised upon more fully
if learners are to make the most of the potential of their devices and to
keep ahead of the evolution of technologies. The technological devel-
opments from one technology to the next are typically manageable,
and as a result, the learning curve between these ongoing hardware
and software upgrades can be relatively mild, meaning that apps and
resources can be compatible through multiple device or operating
system changes. Ultimately, this indicates that learners have the poten-
tial to benefit from their devices as a part of their language learning for
decades if they need to.
A stumbling block impeding lifelong mobility is, however, that the
learner needs to be able to evolve along with the technologies and do
so with little if any support. Some resources that were once central to a
learner’s needs may no longer be relevant several years later, but it is
the learners themselves that need to be aware of this evolution and to
keep abreast of it. This is where a predicament facing teachers and
designers becomes clear – that is, providing a foundation for sustain-
ability of mobile learning not only in the immediate learning context
but also in learners’ future lives. Designing learning for a known
environment is, of course, a difficult undertaking (see Chapter 8),
but designing for future, largely unknown environments is an obstacle
that teachers and course administrators will need to bear in mind.
9.2 Concepts in MALL 177
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
What is required is to lead learners to be evaluators of their own
individual learning ecology, including the available resources and their
immediate relevance and also their potential relevance in the future.
This needs to be included in the design phase of any course of study
that feature mobile devices. As has been lamented by Burston (2015)
and others, true mobile learning needs to go beyond the here and now,
and teachers and designers need to have an eye on the future needs and
contexts of the learners to assist them in their lifelong learning that will
likely be heavily supported by mobile devices.
9.2.2 Interactivity
Interactivity is considered a central element of successful mobile learn-
ing (Churchill, Fox & King 2016; Khamparia & Pandey, 2020; see
also Chapter 5). Mobile devices have made it possible for learners to
interact with one another, with teachers, with content, with other
devices, with objects encountered in their daily environment, with
learning spaces, and even with people that they will ever know only
in a virtual capacity. This interactivity is extremely attractive, built on
sociocultural principles that we learn from others through social
encounters with those that possess the skills or knowledge that we
require for the various tasks that we carry out in our lives (Bandura,
2001; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). Mobile devices have changed the way
in which we interact with people and information on a day-to-day
basis, both in quantity and quality. A typical user will check their
phone as many as sixty times a day, coming to a daily average of more
than three hours, and 70 percent of the checks of their phones are
shorter than two minutes (MacKay, 2019). These scattered exchanges
of abbreviated snippets of intertwined information with numerous
people through various apps and platforms form the foundations of
the relationships that we have people and comprise a large proportion
of the interactions that we have with them. Similarly, we interact with
news and information by scanning through headlines or key pieces of
information (Xie, 2019), but we rarely engage with information in
depth – we skip from one source of information to another until we
ultimately forget what it was that we were looking for in the first place
(Rosen, 2012). This rather bleak outlook on interactivity is intended
to illustrate that while interaction is a key aspect of MALL, not all
interactions can be considered as ideal, and simply having more inter-
action does not necessarily mean that this interaction is better, par-
ticularly if it is scattered and attention directed towards these
interactions is limited. However, these brief encounters with people
and information through mobile devices are becoming the “new
178 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
normal,” and as a result, it is likely that education – including lan-
guage education – that features mobile devices as a prominent part of
the learning process will face a fundamental change as our cognitive
processing abilities adapt to this new model of interaction.
As previously alluded to, reading is one area where mobile devices
have started to have a marked impact. There are the obvious funda-
mental differences compared to reading on paper, such as the fact that
pages are scrolled through and not turned, and place marking requires
digital bookmarks that are not the same as inserting a piece of paper
or a finger between pages to quickly refer to something on a different
page. Readers may feel less engaged with online texts (Carr, 2011),
and distractions in the device such as push notifications can make
reading more fragmented, adversely affecting their ability to process
information in the text (Liu & Gu, 2019). Many people engage in
reading – and, indeed, most activities during the day – with a mindset
that Friedman (2006), citing former Microsoft executive Linda Stone,
calls this continuous partial attention – a state where attention is
focussed on multiple textual, visual, and audio sources of information
around them, leading to a result where the ability to concentrate on
any one of these sources is hindered. On mobile devices, information is
often truncated to fit onto the smaller screens (Krug, 2014), with
designers opting to include less text as a means of saving space. As
reading takes place more frequently through mobile devices, many
people are simply becoming less able to read longer texts, which is
gradually leading to a decline in academic ability (Dewan, 2019).
Thus, when it comes to reading, interaction with the content can be
considered as engaging with a different quantity and quality of infor-
mation as a result of mobile devices, and attention is prone to be split
between multiple foci.
Visual interpersonal interaction is another area that mobile devices
are being used, most particularly with one-to-one or group video
conferencing. To some extent, this type of interaction most closely
resembles face-to-face interaction, but there is increased evidence of
differences emerging between video-conferencing-based and live face-
to-face communication. Clearly, one difference is that interlocutors
can choose to show as much or as little of themselves through the
screen, but the lack of the physical presence of interlocutors at close
proximity can make it easy to forget that fine details may be clearly
visible to other participants in video conferencing. This may cause
participants to not consider their attire when engaging in these inter-
actions or to carry out subconscious actions such as nose blowing
directly in front of the camera on their devices that will be seen clearly
by the others and perceived as rude or inappropriate (Neustaedter,
9.2 Concepts in MALL 179
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Greenberg & Boyle, 2006). Eye contact is another part of interaction
that is different, where participants who communicate through video
are more likely to look at their interlocutors’ faces when compared to
face-to-face interaction (Kuhn, Teszka, Tenaw & Kingstone, 2016),
most likely as a means of compensating for any visual cues that may be
lost through using the video. While there are many multimodal tools
that are emerging that are designed to simulate face-to-face communi-
cation, in many ways, it is still difficult to encapsulate the same experi-
ence. Screen sharing enables people communicating through video
conferencing tools to see view documents, presentations, or even
videos simultaneously, virtual “whiteboards” make it possible to
handwrite on shared white spaces using a mouse or stylus, and par-
ticipants can collaborate on documents in real time and see the revi-
sions being made by others who are remotely distant. When video
communication is carried out on mobile devices, however, there are
other limitations that are linked closely to the affordances of the
device. Smaller screens as always are an ongoing concern, but when
screen sharing is employed, the amount of screen space that can be
allocated to seeing the faces of the participants in the communication
is drastically reduced, again changing the dimensions of the interaction
between the participants. Despite these limitations, this is not to say
that the communication is necessary inferior to face-to-face communi-
cation in terms of quantity and quality, but it is definitely different,
and being aware of these differences can enable planning for inter-
action in a way that these potential difficulties can be circumvented to
make a more rewarding interaction experience for all of the partici-
pants involved.
9.2.3 Agency and Sociomateriality
As discussed in Chapter 7, agency refers to the ability to make and act
on decisions that can have an impact how one lives (Martin, 2004).
Agency has typically been deemed as a trait that is applicable only to
humans or sentient animals (Knappett & Malafouris, 2008), but the
concept of “non-human agency” has, in fact, been a contentious issue
for many years. Proponents of actor–network theory (ANT) advocate
that even inanimate artefacts have agency as they act as mediators to
shape cognitive or material engagement processes (e.g., Casper, 1994;
Sayes, 2014; van der Leeuw, 2008). This concept has already been
applied to education from an ANT standpoint, including the role of
technology in education, where all of the elements of a learner’s
environment have the potential to transform the social networks
they are a part of (e.g., Fenwick & Edwards, 2010). According
180 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to Thumlert, de Castell and Jenson (2015), learner agency is “net-
worked, co-constituted, and never a ‘standalone’ accomplishment”
(p. 787), and technological artefacts can have an immense impact on
the ecology of the learning environment in which learners find them-
selves. Obviously, how technology is used affects the impact that it has
on the user – for example, as a resource repository, a means of
interacting with others, or as a tutor with its own instructional design
principles. As described in the previous section, while human–human
interaction is necessarily altered by technology that takes place
through it, proxy agency will typically depend on the actions taken
by the interlocutor(s), which may be restricted by their own individual
time and other constraints.
A technological artefact may not only support human agency in its
ability to distribute cognition to support the cognitive aspects of infor-
mation processing and storage (Sutton, 2008; see also Chapter 5), but
it may also take on its own pseudo agency through being given the
“illusion of life” (Suchman, 2007, p. 207). Non-human agents,
Suchman argues, simulate human interaction through artificial intelli-
gence, giving an image of agency. The use of artificial intelligence has
been in existence in language teaching and learning for decades,
particularly as the foundation for adaptive systems in testing (e.g.,
Chalhoub-Deville & Deville, 1999; Tseng, 2016). There is certainly an
ongoing need for systems that can adapt to learner responses for
evaluative purposes or to provide materials that are appropriate to
learner needs such as placement tests, but the possibilities for software
agency for mobile learning can extend beyond this. Suchman (2007)
alludes to two different types of software agents: support agents and
autonomous agents. A support agent provides guidance to help users
overcome information overload that stems from a lack of familiarity
with elements of a system. It may take the form of a chatbot (or
chatterbot), which enables users to communicate with a user in much
the same way they might with a live user. These have been used
extensively with online customer service, although not without some
difficulties with communication breakdown and misunderstanding
(Følstad & Taylor, 2020). In language teaching and learning, chatbots
have been as a means of practicing conversation – acting as a support
for learners with anxiety about speaking in the target language (Kim,
2019) – but for the most part, the future intention has been to interact
with a human conversation partner (Fryer, Nakao & Thompson,
2019). There is already an established body of research that has shown
how support agents such as chatbots can facilitate learners with lower
motivation (Fryer & Carpenter, 2006; Kim, 2017), but an area that is
of particular interest to MALL is the potential of autonomous agents.
9.2 Concepts in MALL 181
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The nature of such autonomous agents is encapsulated by Suchman
(2007), where she described ideal software agents as artefacts that will
come to “know” their users and, through mobile technologies, will
accompany them constantly. Through their interconnectedness with
other devices, such agents will at times stay home in place of users and
at other times “travel” to carry out services in their stead, providing
“greater mobility without a loss of familiar ground” (p. 207). Their
autonomy stems from their ability to not only follow the commands of
users to fulfil predetermined goals but also to pre-empt user needs and
to act in advance of a user giving it directions. This type of autono-
mous agent can work as a personal assistant by understanding learner
needs and responding to them. While the technical and ethical aspects
of AI software that maintains data on users have been come into
question (e.g., Hois, 2019), a mobile-based autonomous agent needs
to acquire a certain amount of information about users to function,
which may include location data and other information from apps.
A support agent for language teaching and learning would need to
have similar functionality, enabling parsing of information that the
learner has access to pertaining to their use of the target language and
include functions to curate new information into an accessible format
for the user, presented at the right time and place. Quite obviously,
there is a need to address the privacy concerns of an autonomous
software agent that could provide proxy agency for learners (see
Chapter 7, for a discussion of agency), but coupled with the notion
of lifelong mobility, the possibilities of tools that can keep the learner
in touch with relevant language input through mobile devices are
worth exploring.
While ANT was also originally conceived as a social theory, it is a
related concept, sociomateriality, that further explores the social
interrelationship between artefacts and humans. According to socio-
material principles, the social and the material are inextricably inter-
twined to the extent that one has become indistinguishable from the
other in many respects. The user is seen as part of the “sociomaterial
assemblage that comprises a functioning machine” (Suchman, 2007,
p. 190), unwittingly “configured” by the technology despite the
illusion of the reverse. User behaviour is shaped by the way in which
a technology is designed; for example, abbreviations in text messa-
ging emerged from the affordances of early hardware and software,
and decisions about when to download large files or videos may be
dependent on the amount of available data remaining or access to
Wi-Fi. Orlikowski (2007) provides a stark example of the potential
impact of technology on human behaviour with the results of a
182 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
search on Google. A search using the Google search engine will
provide different results depending on when the search is conducted,
based on a complex interplay of “servers, databases, indexes, and
algorithms, and reflects considerable choices made about its design,
construction, and operation” (p. 1439). The results that feature
highly in the PageRank algorithm from this combination of factors
at the time the search is conducted are “temporally emergent”
(Pickering, 1995, p. 14), yet this technologically supported presenta-
tion of information may have a direct impact on the choices a person
may make. From the opposite perspective, Google itself has not
remained unchanged over time, and the way in which information
is curated is shaped by the voices of the users who use it to conduct
searches (Gabe, 2019), and mobile phones are constantly being
redesigned as a result of customer feedback (Seker, 2020). Thus,
sociomaterialism may be viewed from a technocentric perspective,
which examines how technology modifies human action, and a
human-centred perspective, focussing on how humans “make sense
of and interact with technology in various circumstances”
Orlikowski (2007, p. 1437). Each perspective needs to be considered
in terms of the other, and separating them can give a skewed view of
the reality of the relationship between them.
The connotations of sociomateriality also have a direct bearing on
language learning, particularly as we see mobile devices being used
more widely in the overall learning ecology. The technological arte-
facts are shaping what, when, how, and even why a language is
learned, with choices being made about which apps or resources to
use as a result of the rankings in the relevant app stores, calculated by
sophisticated algorithms that reflect those in Google’s search engine.
The resources that learners choose to view on their mobile devices
will depend upon the technical affordances of the devices that they
own, with decisions made about what tasks and activities to engage
in being influenced by factors such as screen size, storage, processor
speed, and Internet access. Design of language learning resources for
mobile devices also needs to be carried out cognizant of these socio-
material aspects; that is, what impact will the software and hardware
have on the learner, and, in turn, what procedures are there in place
to gather feedback from learners that can be used for improved
design? Keeping the symbiotic relationship of artefact and user in
mind can contribute to understanding learner behaviour while learn-
ing with mobile devices and can inform how to continue to evolve
with technological developments as well as the changing needs and
skills of the learner.
9.2 Concepts in MALL 183
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
9.3 Contexts in MALL
9.3.1 Pluralistic Development of MALL Contexts
Although it has been argued that the distinction between formal
and informal learning are becoming increasingly blurred over time
(e.g., Hubbard, 2020) –particularly when mobile devices are involved –
there remains, to a certain degree, a gap between the research and
practice that takes place in formal settings compared to the research
and practice that takes place in informal ones. A lot of research
surrounding informal learning focusses on identity development as a
user of the target language (e.g., Chik, 2020), but to many learners
who are in compulsory classes where learning a foreign language is
little more than memorising syntax and vocabulary in order to solve
convoluted questions in order to attain a high score on an achievement
test or to gain entry into a higher-level educational institution where
the language is often taught at a level that fails to even reach that of the
exit point of the previous one. The rather gloomy picture painted here
of formal learning contexts obviously does not reflect all environ-
ments, and there are many examples of learners engaging actively with
the target language in authentic language learning events as a part of
their formal studies (e.g., Fazzi & Lasagabaster, 2020; Wrigglesworth
& Harvor, 2018). As Merriam and Bierema (2013) suggest, learning
successfully in informal contexts can be quite subtle, being self-
directed, incidental, subconscious, and integrated with conscious
learning activities. Each of these points is dependent upon learner
agency, an attribute that is more likely to emerge when learners have
clear goals in mind for learning the target language, except the last
point, integration, which alludes to a bridge between formal and
informal learning contexts.
Learners who are in situations where the onus for learning falls on
their own shoulders may struggle to find ways to relate their everyday
self-directed experiences to conscious learning activities, preferring to
seek out opportunities to gain exposure to the language instead. At the
same time, learners in formal learning environments simply may not
see how the study that they are undertaking relates to any meaningful
target language usage. A critical look at the practice of language
teaching and learning reveals that for the most part, pedagogies for
formal contexts have developed quite independently of pedagogies
for informal ones, and there is little cross-pollination between the
two. As discussed in Chapter 7, learners in formal learning contexts
are rarely provided with sufficient training in order to achieve a level
of autonomy that will allow them to continue with the studies in a
184 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
self-directed manner unless there is sufficient motivation for learners to
do so. At the same time, learners who are informal learning environ-
ments find that they lack the skills to engage in useful language
learning activities, a problem which is particularly evident in new
migrants (Cummings, Sturm & Avram, 2020).
It is here that mobile technologies provide the means of bridging the
gap, where learning activities and tasks can be taken out into the real
world, and the world can be brought into the classroom. However, the
only way that this gap can be bridged – even with the existence of the
tools to do so – is to ensure that training can be made available to
learners in each of these situations.
The difficulty of the rift between formal and informal learning is also
evident in research as well. Research that takes place in formal learning
contexts is seldom relevant to informal ones and vice versa. Indeed, the
divergence in the ways in which learners are interacting with mobile
devices means that it is becoming increasingly difficult to conduct
worthwhile research that can capture the myriad ways that learners
can exploit their devices to engage with the target language to boost
their acquisition of the language. These learning experiences are
happening as a part of both formal and informal environments, very
much prompted by the skills and motivation of the learners themselves.
Research in formal contexts is easier to conduct because the variables
are easier to control for when compared to learners who are in natural-
istic settings, but there is still a great deal that is not understood about
what learners do once they step outside of the classroom. One method
that can be used is to explore individual learners’ use of technology
through the systematic use of case studies (Grin, Rotmans & Schot,
2010). Case studies can be written up as historical narratives without an
explicit theory, but parts of this narrative can be explained by hypoth-
eses and theoretical mechanisms, which in turn allows the narrative to
be converted into an analytical explanation through identifying pat-
terns embedded in the theoretical perspectives that can be used to
develop more generalisable theoretical arguments (George & Bennett,
2004). In this way, it is possible to go beyond speculation and anecdotal
evidence of what learners are doing when they are not immediately
visible to teachers or researchers and create a solid foundation on which
to build pedagogies that would be appropriate for learners who are in
formal contexts, informal contexts, or a combination of the two.
9.3.2 Mobile Learning for Crisis Management
Teaching with technology is something that is considered as a natural
part of the educational environment to some, but to many – if not
9.3 Contexts in MALL 185
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
most – others, the thought of using technology as the primary means
of instruction is almost unimaginable. As discussed in Chapter 5, it is
not uncommon for in-service (and indeed pre-service) teachers to have
never had the opportunity to experience technology as a key element
of their own education, and while they see the potential, the time and
energy needed to acquire the skills to include technology in their
teaching often has a low priority. The COVID-19 coronavirus that
spread around the world in early 2020 turned essentially every walk of
life upside down, with self-isolation being enforced on a global scale.
Needless to say, education was one of the areas that was also heavily
affected, with teachers suddenly finding themselves in situations where
they were expected to teach their students from a distance. Most
institutions were ill-prepared and scrambled to put together materials
that could be taught using online methods in what came to be termed
as “pandemic pedagogy” (Milman, 2020). With just weeks or even
days to shift curriculum into online modes, a patchwork of resources
was combined into a teaching regime to try to avoid falling behind in
their teaching goals.
For teachers with experience with teaching with technology, getting
through the crisis largely entailed some adjustment of the tools that
they had already prepared for their regular teaching. The COVID-19
outbreak showed, however, that for those teachers without such
experience, the logistics of how to conduct online teaching typically
needed to be decided quickly, with little or no time for pre-planning,
and implementation was usually done “on the fly” as teachers pre-
pared for online delivery on an ongoing basis throughout the courses
they were teaching. While the dangers in this are obvious, in many – if
not most – cases, teachers found themselves with little alternative, as
they attempted to apply the limited skills that they had with tools they
were largely unfamiliar with to prepare for classes that attempted to
simulate what they were used to in their existing face-to-face environ-
ments. At the time of writing this book, the situation was not con-
cluded, and speculations regarding the prospects of online teaching
and learning as a viable method of instruction were widely circulated.
Expectations appeared through various media outlets, with predic-
tions for both the success and the failure of online learning, and some
saw this crisis as a chance to prove the (in)effectiveness of learning
through technology at a distance (Zimmerman, 2020).
Some have argued that the term “online teaching” was not appro-
priate to use in the crisis, advocating expressions such as “emergency
remote teaching” (Hodges, Moore, Lockee, Trust & Bond, 2020),
which emphasised the difficulties in trying to carry out effective online
teaching without having the time or resources to prepare properly.
186 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The reality is, however, that it actually was online teaching, and to
many, the first experience with it that they had as either a teacher or a
learner. It is here that the expression “first impressions last” takes on a
particularly poignant meaning. As Norman (2013) argues, the experi-
ences that users have are critical in that they determine how positively
users remember their interactions with an artefact or event. Negative
emotions are long-lasting and can have a detrimental impact on a
user’s willingness to engage with an artefact again in the future. This
is a point of particular relevance for both teachers and learners in crisis
situations. It is unlikely that it is just the learners who felt the inad-
equacies of many of the support framework put in place under hurried
conditions, and teachers found themselves stressed and simultaneously
both proud of yet dissatisfied with the finished products that they
created and used in their teaching.
The crisis highlighted the fact that it sometimes takes emergency
situations such as the pandemic to heighten the awareness of what can
and cannot be done through teaching online. As Milman (2020) points
out, online teaching needs to be planned in advance with an under-
standing of how the different elements of the course fit together with
one another and with the available tools. As has been mentioned at a
number of points throughout this book, learners will likely be using a
combination of mobile and non-mobile devices as a part of their
learning, and designers will need to consider how these will work
together with one another. Mobile devices are very much a central
part of the online teaching that takes place, generally as this is the
primary technology owned by many, particularly if there are multiple
users in a single household that are required to engage in online
learning simultaneously. However, the question of how to engage in
MALL during such crises is a difficult one. In crisis situations like
the COVID-19 outbreak, self-isolation meant that learners could not
be physically mobile, often forced to self-isolate to avoid spreading the
virus. However, learners were able to use their mobile devices to make
their learning experiences mobile, even if virtually. Resources were not
only stored locally, but teachers could screen-share their own
resources to make them available to learners, in one sense moving
themselves into the learners’ individual spaces in a way that they had
not done before, with teachers and learners exposing elements of their
private lives to one another, such as sharing videos showing the inside
of their own homes.
A potential outcome of the COVID-19 crisis is that it demonstrated
a need for further consideration of crisis management of education.
Crisis management in itself has been covered as an academic field
of study and research in organisational management for many years
9.3 Contexts in MALL 187
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
(e.g., Mintzberg, 1994), but there has been little discussion of crisis
management that occurs within education itself. One of the conclu-
sions of the COVID-19 outbreak was that it confirmed Slater’s (2017)
view that dealing with unexpected emergencies in education is depend-
ent upon human resource and structural leadership frames, and both
of these were stretched to their limits during the pandemic. The crisis
emphasised how ill-prepared most institutions were to deal with emer-
gencies, making the need for new infrastructure and new policies clear.
The problem is, however, that both require time, money, and know-
how to be put in place appropriately. An issue which has been raised
with regards to crisis management is the danger in over-engineering as
a result of crisis, where restructuring without sufficient planning and
keeping an eye on the needs of both employees (teachers) and custom-
ers (students) can be a recipe for disaster (Bolman & Deal, 2017).
Plans need to be reasonable, and not a simple knee-jerk reaction that
can have a damaging impact on other areas of education.
As was discussed in Chapter 1, technology has often been con-
sidered as a potential means of saving money, despite the fact that
the evidence invariably points to the opposite. During the crisis, costs
were, to a certain extent, kept down by many service providers making
their services available for free or very low costs as an interim measure,
and as a result, various providers rose from anonymity to fame virtu-
ally overnight with huge demand for the free or extended services they
offered for education during this time. However, if introduced on a
large scale, these measures will, of course, have ongoing costs associ-
ated with them, and there is a risk that ineffective, cost-inefficient
strategies will be put in place that may not fulfil the desired purpose,
should another crisis arise. As has been seen all too often with the
outcomes of calamities such as natural disasters, designing for crisis
situations rarely matches the needs of the moment when they actually
occur (e.g., Farazmand, 2016). The key point to bear in mind here is
that designing online learning is no different from other forms of
learning with technology, requiring a thoughtful design process (as
described in Chapter 8). Sometimes crises can be the catalyst needed
for changes in perception, and new systems introduced as a result of
crisis have the potential to provide dramatically improved results,
despite the chaos and breakdown that occurs in the short term
(Bolman & Deal, 2017). If change is to take place, then it needs to
be done in an informed manner. Models for teaching language skills
online certainly exist, and it is where teachers and researchers who
have extensive experience with teaching languages at a distance can
provide invaluable insight into how to employ best practice (e.g.,
188 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Stickler, Hampel & Emke, 2020). In regions where computers are
prohibitively expensive, mobile devices have very often been used as
the primary device for learning. In other cases, as schools reopen,
students may be expected to use their mobile devices as a means to
maintain social distancing rather than using shared computers. It is
possible that the COVID-19 outbreak may eventually lead to a shift in
views towards mobile learning – including MALL – as a viable option
to support language teaching and learning, but only time will tell
regarding how it is viewed by teachers, learners, and administrators
in the long term.
9.4 Challenges in MALL
9.4.1 The Nexus of Learner and Teacher Training
The range of challenges that could be listed in this section are far too
great to give any of them suitable coverage in the space here, so the
discussion will be limited to two main areas: the complexities of
the relationship between teacher and learner education and the chal-
lenge of how to deal with evolving technologies. As is so often the case,
there is a degree of overlap between them, but they also have their own
individual idiosyncrasies. The importance of teacher education – and
most notably with regards to teaching with technology – has until
recently been somewhat undervalued, in part due to the greater focus
on learning (as opposed to teaching) that has dominated education
over the past several decades (Laurillard, 2002, p. 5). A look through
available teacher education titles reveals a paucity of coverage of
technology in books on teacher education unless they specifically focus
on technology, implying that technology is still in many regards as
much on the edges of mainstream language teaching pedagogy as was
bemoaned by Coleman (2005) nearly two decades ago.
As was discussed in Chapter 8, there are several frameworks for
designing learning environments – some explicitly outlining the role
for technology, some applying this to language teaching, and others
relating pedagogy to learning through mobile devices. Guidelines for
instructing teachers to use technology in their individual learning
environments have been less widely employed, but frameworks such
as TPACK (Mishra & Koehler, 2006) have been used as a model of
teacher education, allowing teachers to see the position of techno-
logical knowledge as a part of teaching practice. The main compon-
ents of TPACK – Technical, Pedagogical, [and] Content Knowledge –
are designed to enable teachers to see the balance between each of
9.4 Challenges in MALL 189
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
these elements when they are learning how to use technology as a part
of their teaching and learning. While TPACK provides a basic frame-
work to show the importance of understanding how to avoid being
overly (or under-) biased towards technology amongst other skills, it is
not without criticism, particularly with regards to having too many
domains of knowledge that are difficult to distinguish from one
another (Brantley-Dias & Ertmer, 2013). From a contrasting perspec-
tive, Stickler and Hampel (2015) argue for the development of teach-
ing skills as a pyramid with basic ICT competence at its base, and the
need to develop specific technical competence to deal with particular
artefacts, the ability to facilitate communicative competence and
online socialisation, and – finally, at the top – the importance of one’s
own creativity. Foundational technological skills have gradually
become the norm with the penetration of mobile devices across all
age ranges (Statistica Research Department, 2019), bringing with it a
marked decrease in anxiety towards using technology and even active
usage in higher age ranges for seeking information pertaining to health
and support (Halmdienst, Radhuber & Winter-Ebmer, 2019). Thus,
the hurdle facing the use of technology lies not in familiarity with
technology per se but, rather, with pedagogies that can capitalise
upon it.
There is evidence that suggests learner training in using technology
to achieve specific learning goals can have a positive on learner
attitudes and outcomes (Stockwell & Hubbard, 2014; see also
Chapter 7), but learner training hinges on teachers being able to
conduct this training. Herein lies the challenge for using mobile
devices for learning. Both teachers and learners possess basic skills
with using mobile technologies but lack the knowledge to apply these
skills to effective teaching and learning. Once the psychological barrier
of ignoring mobile devices as potentially powerful learning tools is
broken down, both teachers and learners can start to explore the
possibilities. Collaborative debriefings regarding technology use
(Romeo & Hubbard, 2010) can help both groups to understand ways
in which technologies can be used, and not only can learners acquire
the necessary strategies and skills to use technology for focussed
language learning through such debriefings, but teachers can equally
learn techniques from learners that they can apply back to their
educational environments. In other words, teacher training does not
have to be formalised in all cases, and every interaction between
teachers and learners has the potential to be a rich source of infor-
mation about how to improve practice, which is worthy of
consideration.
190 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
9.4.2 Dealing with Evolving Technologies
As the final section of this book, it may seem prudent to consider the
directions that mobile learning will take in the future. However, any
predictions of the future directions of technology – of which mobile
technologies are now a major part – are fraught with errors, tending to
either overstate or understate the possibilities. For example, cognitive
scientist and an expert in AI at the time, Marvin Minsky, is quoted as
saying “in from three to eight years we will have a machine with the
general intelligence of an average human being” (Darrach, 1970,
p. 58D). Fifty years on, and although artificial intelligence has pro-
gressed remarkably, it would be difficult to claim that it would possess
intelligence of a human on any general level. On the other extreme, co-
founder of YouTube Steve Chen is reported as saying that YouTube
would fail due to a lack of videos that he thought would be of interest.
According to Statistica Research Department (2020), YouTube now
has two billion users worldwide, making it the second-most popular
social network in the world.
Predictions of MALL are equally difficult in many regards. As
Pegrum (2016) points out, “in any discussion of m-learning, we must
take into consideration the larger cultural, political, economic, and
educational ecologies in which mobile technologies, like all technolo-
gies, are embedded” (p. 413). Each of these ecologies is both fragile
and dynamic, and the interplay of these factors can lead to very
different outcomes regarding what devices are developed, when and
where they are available, and how they are used and viewed, including
in educational settings (Glover & Rodger, 2018). And as described
earlier, from a sociomaterial perspective, the uses that emerge from
technological advances ultimately affect the next generation of
development.
New devices are appearing at a phenomenal rate, with mobile,
wearable, and implanted technologies flooding the market (see
Chapter 1). Meanwhile, the rate of flow of these new technologies
into widespread use is dependent upon the financial resources of
individuals and institutions, timing of contracts or leases, and larger
infrastructure shifts such as the introduction of 5G networks (Rao &
Prasad, 2018). One of the consequences of the multifarious rate of
penetration of devices into the wider market is that there will be
technologies of varying levels of sophistication being used by different
users at any one point in time. The development of a new technology
does not mean that older technologies rotate out of common use in the
short term, and older devices will be used in parallel with newer ones
for several years if not even decades. It is largely for this reason that
9.4 Challenges in MALL 191
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the future of MALL is not simply limited to the technological changes
that are taking place, but, rather, MALL needs to be viewed from a
psychosocial perspective, one that includes the perceptions of the
ultimate players in the overall equation that makes up the educational
ecology – the learners, teachers, administrators, designers, and
even family.
Future mobile learning will likely see two main areas that will
expand the use of mobile technologies as viable tools in language
learning: augmented reality and context awareness. Both of these are
enormous fields that have seen exponential developments over the past
decade and have also extended into educational uses. Augmented
reality enables learners to overlay reality with digitally enhanced
multimedia in order to add information that may assist them in
learning – including turning still images on a page to video, providing
extra information about vocabulary, or adding imagery to real life
places (e.g., Godwin-Jones, 2016). The possibilities are indeed very
encouraging, but research has been plagued by technical difficulties
and problems in providing correct overlays (Yang & Mei, 2018).
Context awareness enables mobile devices to tailor the learning
experience to individual locational requirements (Crompton, 2016;
Koenraad, 2019). Through personalisation, learners can have access
to information that can assist them with the needs of the moment,
which can support situated learning (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; see
also Chapter 8). The ways in which these tools will be used are very
much up to the imagination of teachers and designers as well as the
future technological developments, but both make it possible for
learners to capitalise upon the full potential of the mobility of MALL.
9.5 Final Comments
Mobile devices have already firmly secured their place in language
teaching and learning environments, with their uses being shaped not
only by the evolving physical characteristics of the devices themselves,
but also by the constantly shifting landscapes of second language
pedagogies, research agendas, socioeconomic change, and even world-
wide disasters and crises. The contexts in which MALL can take place
are as varied as there are learners, and each individual ecology will
vary – sometimes imperceptibly – from another. These variances can
lead to differences in the processes, the products, the hurdles, and the
successes that learners will experience. It is the personal nature of the
learning ecologies that empowers mobile learning, and learners have
freedom in the choices that they make about their learning, not only in
short-term goals but also lifelong ones. However, the fact that the
192 Concepts, Contexts and Challenges in MALL
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
spread of mobile learning brings about not only possibilities but also
challenges is becoming increasingly evident as research and practice
into the use of mobile devices in education continues – bringing to the
forefront such issues as equity, sustainability, and dealing with
changes, and problems of scale (Crompton & Traxler, 2018). Some
challenges are easier to deal with, and others more difficult, but as long
as there are teachers and learners that dedicate themselves to the
difficult task of broadening language learning experiences, there is
no doubt that mobile devices will feature as an indispensable tool to
enrich and enhance these experiences as an integral part of their lives.
9.5 Final Comments 193
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Glossary
ADDIE – Short for analyse, design, development, implementation and
evaluation, ADDIE has been the foundation of several models of
instructional design since it was originally developed by the US mili-
tary as the “five-step approach” in the 1970s. It later became known
as ADDIE in the 1990s (see Chapter 8).
actor–network theory – A social theory proposed by primarily by
Callon (1986), Latour (1987) and Law (1994) that human and both
living and inanimate non-human entities exist in constantly shifting
networks that impact on one another affording mutual change.
affordances – Proposed by Gibson in 1979, the theory of affordances
explains what an artefact makes possible. It has been widely used in
CALL to refer to the technological functions of a device, but it is also
used to refer to the possibilities that can arise from the properties of a
device that may or may not have been intended by the developers.
Affordances are not only inherent to a device but are also dependent
on the skills, knowledge, experience and imagination of the users of a
device (see Chapter 2).
agency – See learner agency.
artefact – An object that is typically not naturally occurring but rather
made by humans with the purpose of subsequent use. In CALL and
MALL, it is frequently used to refer to either hardware (such as a
computer or mobile phone) or software (such as learning courseware
or an app).
atomised learning – The provision of modules of content for learners
that can be accessed as fragments of a larger whole. It has been
claimed to provide learners with more freedom as learners can choose
small “micro-content” in any order that suits their own preferences or
understanding, but it has also been criticised, as it may lead to gaps in
understanding the overall course and the lack of compatibility with
current models of assessment.
attribution theory – The view that an individual has on the causes of
behaviour and events based on the information that they have
194
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
available to them. These causes may be internal (i.e., a direct result of
the individual themselves) or external (i.e., factors that are beyond the
individual’s control such as circumstances or other people).
augmented reality – The ability to add information to the real world
through technology, such as adding visual overlays to enhance the
user’s perception of reality. It is most commonly used with a mobile
device or wearable technology where the original scene is displayed
with some extra element digitally drawn over the top of this scene.
A common example of this was the Pokémon Go game that was
launched in 2016.
autonomy – See learner autonomy.
app – A term coined by Apple with the release of its first iPhone in
2007 to refer to an application. These were initially limited to tele-
phone and messaging apps, calendars, music players, memos and
cameras but rapidly spread to include video players, games, office
and weather apps, as well as a range of niche apps such as online
banking and shopping. Apps have also been developed specifically for
language learning.
blended learning – The mixture of technological and non-technological
means as part of a course. In its initial definition, blended learning
expected a balance between these elements where both were an integral
part of the whole learning experience, but there has been a shift in
recent years to include basically any combination of technology with
traditional teaching approaches (see Chapter 8).
complexity theory – See dynamic systems theory.
complex dynamic systems theory – Initially based on work by Larsen-
Freeman and Cameron (2008), complex dynamic system theory
explains the lack of linearity in language learning, suggesting that
there are multiple factors at play that may or may not be visible or
consistent. One of the tenets behind complex dynamic systems
theory is that learning outcomes are difficult to predict due to the
unknown influences of various interconnected factors (see
Chapter 5).
context awareness – The ability of a system to determine its environ-
ment based on information it gathers through various sensors such as
GPS, NFC, QR codes or other types of sensors. A context-aware
system is able to adapt to the environment that it detects or provide
contextually relevant information to users.
Glossary 195
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Conversational Framework – Proposed by Laurillard (2002), the role
of technologies in facilitating teaching and learning through inter-
action between the participants in the learning environment (see
Chapter 8).
courseware – Combined from the words course and software. It is
used to refer to educational software that has specific learning goals or
targets embedded in the instructional design, usually incorporating
some kind of multimedia. Courseware is most commonly designed
for running on a computer, but courseware apps recently have also
been created to be used on mobile devices.
cyberslacking – Spending time focussed on tasks through digital tech-
nologies that are unrelated to the required tasks at hand, such as
texting, web browsing, online shopping and checking social media.
directed motivational currents – A proposed theory of sustained
motivation by Dörnyei, Muir and Henry (2016) that learners may be
pulled along towards completion of their goals without a sense of
burden, much like being pulled in a strong current of water. Directed
motivational currents are dependent upon clear goal setting that can
focus learners’ motivation (see Chapter 5).
digital divide – The gap in technology access as a result of socio-
economic factors. People in less affluent regions or situations find it
difficult to afford the latest technologies, sometimes resulting in a gap
of the “haves” and the “have-nots,” which can have an impact not
only on pedagogy but also on how learners feel about themselves
placed in the larger context they find themselves in.
digital literacy – The ability to seek out, evaluate and synthesise infor-
mation through the use of various digital platforms. This may include
the use of search engines, word processors, social media and other
digital resources which may be used to perform desired tasks. Digital
literacy does not replace traditional literacies but, rather, is largely
dependent upon them as the foundation for how digital tools are used.
digital native – A term initially coined by Prensky (2001) which sees
the younger generation as being more comfortable with using tech-
nologies on the basis of being born into a world where technology
surrounds them. It has faced criticism based on its lack of empirical
validity and due to its potentially discriminatory implications.
dual systems theory – Developed from work by Evans (2003), dual
systems theory suggests that the human mind processes information
through two systems, one conscious and the other unconscious.
196 Glossary
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Habitual behaviour can be attributed to the unconscious system
and requires the conscious system to inhibit these habits (see
Chapter 5).
dynamic systems theory – See complex dynamic systems theory.
emergency remote teaching – A response to a crisis (such as the 2020
COVID-19 pandemic) where educators around the world are forced to
commence online teaching in the midst of school closures with min-
imal skills training and preparation time.
engagement – The way in which a learner undertakes a task or
activity. It has most typically referred to the amount of time that a
learner spends on the task or activity, but it may also refer to the
cognitive, affective and social impact that it may have.
expectancy-value theory – The concept that the expectancies and
values that an individual places on a given activity will impact upon
subsequent behaviour. The greater the expectation that is held by
individuals regarding their success through the activity, the more likely
that they will be to expend time and effort on it. It is also dependent
upon their beliefs regarding their own competences and abilities to
complete the activity.
flipped classroom – A model of learning that seeks to maximise
effective use of class time by requiring learners to preview content
before class through readings or videos so that they can discuss it in
class. It is possible to use this model without technology, but it has
been popularised with the penetration of digital devices. It has faced
some criticism in that it requires learners to be sufficiently disciplined
to review materials in advance of class.
GSM phone – One of the many terms which have been used to refer
to phones prior to smartphones. Also sometimes called “dumb
phones,” these phones typically had considerably smaller screens
and fewer functions than smartphones but still provided SMS, email
and Internet access through a GSM (initially 2G and later 3G)
network. Most GSM phones also allowed for a limited number of
applications, usually restricted to the particular service provider.
hype cycle – Originally coined in 1995 by a research organisation
called Gartner, it is used to describe the stages that a technology is
likely to go through from its initial inception. It is broken down into
five stages: innovation (technology) trigger, peak of inflated expect-
ations, trough of disillusionment, slope of enlightenment and plateau
of productivity.
Glossary 197
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
learner agency – The degree to which learners proactively involve
themselves in the learning process. It is based on the tenet that learners
will have a more fulfilling and successful learning experience if they
take charge of their own learning.
language socialisation – The modification of language by users to meet
the conventions of a particular social context (see Chapter 5).
learner autonomy – The concept of learners taking responsibility for
their own learning, popularised by Holec (1981) (see Chapter 7).
learner training – The provision of instruction in how to use technolo-
gies for learning purposes with the goal of enabling learners to con-
sider their own strategy usage (see Chapter 6).
LMS – A system that allows teachers to provide content and carry out
assessment online. Also known as a virtual learning environment
(VLE), an LMS typically makes it possible to maintain communication
with learners through various text, audio and video-based tools and to
track learner access to the online resources. There are both open-
source (e.g., Moodle) and proprietary (e.g., Blackboard) LMSs, and
many institutions will use an LMS to support courses they offer, even
if the course is predominantly face to face.
MOOC – An abbreviation for massive open online course, it is type of
free online course offering unlimited enrolments that was started as a
part of the open educational resources (OER) movement in 2008.
More traditional MOOCs have been referred to as xMOOCs, whereas
more interactive models that allow for more freedom of selection of
content have been called cMOOCs. Attrition rates of MOOCs have
remained extremely high, with the vast majority of students who enrol
failing to complete them.
MP3 player – A type of portable digital audio player. Most MP3
players are capable of playing audio files of several different formats
including but not limited to MP3 and also include a recording function
and allow the downloading of audio recordings called podcasts. MP3
players have been largely replaced by music-playing and sound-
recording apps of smartphones since the mid-2010s.
multitasking – The ability to perform two or more tasks or routines
at the same time. The term multitasking has been applied to operat-
ing systems where routines can run in the background at the same
time as primary routines can be accessed by users. It has been used
by humans in their ability to do multiple things at the same time, but
there is evidence to suggest that most people are simply shifting their
198 Glossary
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
attention between tasks rather than actually performing multiple
tasks simultaneously.
normalisation – A concept proposed by Bax (2003) where technology
will become such a natural part of the learning context that it will no
longer be noticed by the users, but rather it will be picked up as easily
as pen and paper.
novelty effect – The initial enthusiasm associated with using a technol-
ogy in the early stages.
PDA – Often thought of as a forerunner to the smartphone, a PDA is a
handheld mobile device (also known as a palmtop) that allows for
making telephone calls; sending of text messages, faxes and emails;
and accessing the Internet. Early PDAs were typically stylus based with
character recognition technology, but later PDAs incorporated a small
physical keyboard. They have now been largely replaced by smart-
phones and tablets.
selective attention shifting – Diverting attention away from a primary
task in order to do other tasks like checking messages for some period
of time before returning to the original task again (see Chapter 6).
self-determination theory – Made up of three basic human needs –
autonomy, competence and relatedness – self-determination theory
explores the motivations behind a learner’s actions to understand the
degree to which they are self-determined.
serious games – Games that do not have entertainment or enjoyment
as their primary function but, rather, may be used for training or
promotion of critical thinking. Serious games can also include educa-
tional games, where users may be trained in a specific skill or theme
including a focus on a particular language skill or practice in behaving
in a certain situation.
smartphone – A mobile device that was created in 2007 that includes
telephoning; Internet access; sending and receiving of messages; and
various apps such as calendars, memos, music players, games and
cameras. They differ from GSM phones that preceded them in that
they have a far larger screen with an onscreen keyboard, and a range
of apps are made available through dedicated online stores rather than
the limited range installed by the network provider.
social networking – The use of online websites or apps to find and
interact with other people. Many people use social networking as a
way of catching up with friends and family members that they know
Glossary 199
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
offline, but others use it as a way of meeting new people with similar
interests to their own. Common social networking service (SNS) sites
include Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, but there are many localised
social networking services that are used for a particular purpose or in
specific regions.
sociomateriality – The complex relationship between artefacts and
people who use them. All the view of any object is social, and its
functions and value are dependent upon social contexts. Conversely,
any social action is made possible through the use of artefacts, and
actions are shaped in some way by these artefacts.
SNS – See social networking.
tablet – A roughly book-sized portable electronic device with touchsc-
reen technology and onscreen inputting, initially with a stylus but later
with an onscreen keyboard, that preceded the smartphone. Although
there were several forerunners, tablets (originally “tablet computers”)
that resemble modern devices were developed in 2000 by Microsoft.
Many current tablets now use software that is typically associated
with laptop computers.
teacher training – A field of education that looks at how both pre-
service and in-service teachers can receive training that will enhance
their usage of technology in their teaching and learning contexts.
TPACK – Devised by Mishra and Koehler (2006), TPACK (techno-
logical, pedagogical and content knowledge) is a teaching model that
encourages teachers to focus on more than just the technology but also
to have an understanding of appropriate pedagogy and sufficient
knowledge of the content.
training – See learner training or teacher training.
translanguaging – Strategic use of available linguistic resources in
order to convey meaning. Speakers of multiple languages may rely
on any or all of their language skills to communicate to speakers who
may share some knowledge of these languages.
ubiquitous learning – Learning that is supported by mobile, fixed and/
or wearable technologies that are networked to allow a seamless flow
of information between them. Learners may choose the tool or tools
most appropriate to the environment that they are in at a given point
in time.
virtual reality – The simulation of real or imagined environments
through the use of technology that makes users feel as though they
200 Glossary
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
are immersed in it. Commonly achieved through a wearable head-
mounted display that may provide a three-dimensional effect, users
may interact with the objects that are digitally created within the
virtual world that they are in.
wearable technology – Technologies that are worn by the users at very
close physical proximity rather than carried in a pocket or bag. The
most common examples of wearable technologies are smart watches
and smart glasses, which like their traditional namesakes, are worn by
the users as a part of their daily routine.
Glossary 201
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
References
Abdous, M., Camaera, M. M. & Facer, B. R. (2009). MALL technology: Use of
academic podcasting in the foreign language classroom. ReCALL, 21(1),
76–95.
Abeysekera, L. & Dawson, P. (2015). Motivation and cognitive load in the
flipped classroom: Definition, rationale and a call for research. Higher
Education Research & Development, 35(1), 1–14.
Abuhamdeh, S. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2012). Attentional involvement and
intrinsic motivation. Motivation and Emotion, 36(3), 257–267.
ACTFL. (2013). Program standards for the preparation of foreign language
teachers (2013). Alexandria, VA: American Council on the Teaching of
Foreign Languages (ACTFL).
Al-Emran, M., Elsherif, H. M. & Shaalan, K. (2016). Investigating attitudes
towards the use of mobile learning in higher education. Computers in
Human Behavior, 56, 93–102.
Al-Emran, M., Mezhuyev, V. & Kamaludin, A. (2018). Technology acceptance
model in M-learning: A systematic review. Computers & Education, 125,
389–412.
Alter, A. (2017). Irresistible: The rise of addictive technology and the business of
keeping us hooked. New York: Penguin Press.
Anderson, J. (1987). Computer-assisted language learning. Prospects, 17(3),
417–429.
Anderson, L. W. & Krathwohl, D. R. (eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning,
teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational object-
ives (abridged ed.). New York: Wesley Longman.
Appel, C. & Mullen, T. (2002). A new tool for teachers and researchers involved
in e-mail tandem language learning. ReCALL, 14(2), 195–208.
Bailey, K. M. (1990). The use of diary studies in teacher education programs. In
J. C. Richards & D. Nunan (eds.), Second language teacher education.
(pp. 215–225). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Baker, F. B. & Kim, S.-H. (2017). The basics of item response theory using
R. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive
theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1991). Social cognitive theory of moral thought and action. In W.
M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz (eds.), Handbook of moral behavior and devel-
opment (pp. 45–103). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York:
W. H. Freeman.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual
Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26.
202
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Barrette, C. (2001). Students’ preparedness and training for CALL. CALICO
Journal, 19(1), 5–36.
Barson, J. & Debski, R. (1996). Calling back CALL: Technology in the service of
foreign language learning based on creativity, contingency, and goal-oriented
activity. In M. Warschauer (ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learn-
ing (pp. 49–68). Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Second Language Teaching
and Curriculum Center.
Bax, S. (2003). CALL: Past, present and future. System, 31(1), 13–28.
Beauvois, D. H. (1995). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign
language classroom: Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals,
25(5), 455–464.
Beck, J., Czerniak, C. H. & Lumpe, A. (2000). An exploratory study of teachers’
beliefs regarding the implementation of constructivism in their classrooms.
Journal of Science Teacher Education, 11(4), 323–343.
Beeres-Scheenstra, R., Ohnsorg, C., Candreia, C., Heinzmann, S., Castellanos, S.,
de Min, N. & Linder, T. E. (2017). Single-center study investigating foreign
language acquisition at school in children, adolescents, and young adults with
uni- or bilateral cochlear implants in the Swiss German population. Otology &
Neurotology, 38(6), 833–838.
Bennett, S., Dawson, P., Bearman, M., Molloy, E. & Boud, D. (2017).
How technology shapes assessment design: Findings from a study of
university teachers. British Journal of Educational Technology, 48(2),
672–682.
Benson, P. (2013). Teaching and research autonomy (2nd ed.). Abingdon:
Routledge.
Benson, P., Chappell, P. & Yates, L. (2018). A day in the life: Mapping inter-
national students’ language learning environments in multilingual Sydney.
Australian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(1), 20–32.
Benson, P. & Voller, P. (eds.). (2013). Autonomy and independence in language
learning. Abingdon: Routledge.
Berger, P. (2017). Beyond plain except or sheer resistance: A typology of univer-
sity instructors’ attitudes to students’ media use in class. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 67, 410–417.
Blaj-Ward, L. (2017). Language learning and use in English-medium higher
education. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on Spanish L2
interlanguage. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136.
Blake, R. (2016). Technology and the four skills. Language Learning &
Technology, 20(2), 129–142.
Blin, F. (2016). Towards an “ecological” CALL theory: Theoretical perspectives
and their instantiation in CALL research and practice. In F. Farr & L. Murray
(eds.), Routledge handbook of language learning and technology (pp. 39–54).
New York: Taylor & Francis.
Bloom, B. (1954). The thought processes of students in discussion. In S. J. French
(ed.), Accent on teaching: Experiments in general education (pp. 23–46). New
York: Harper.
References 203
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Blyth, A. (2015). Social media ethics in English language teaching. The JALT
CALL Journal, 11(2), 165–176.
Bodsworth, H. & Goodyear, V. A. (2017). Barriers and facilitators to using
digital technologies in the Cooperative Learning model in physical education.
Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy, 22(6), 563–579.
Bolman, L. G. & Deal, T. E. (2017). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice,
and leadership (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Boonbrahm, S., Kaewrat, C. & Boonbrahm, P. (2015). Using augmented reality
technology in assisting English learning for primary school students. In
P. Zaphiris & A. Ioannou (eds.), Learning and collaboration technologies.
LCT 2015. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9192. (pp. 24–32).
Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., Lack, K. A. & Nygren, T. I. (2014). Interactive
learning online at public universities: Evidence from a six-campus randomized
trial. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1), 94–111.
Bower, M. & Sturman, D. (2015). What are the educational affordances of
wearable technologies? Computers & Education, 88, 343–353.
Bradley, L., Lindström, N. B. & Hashemi, S. S. (2017). Integration and language
learning of newly arrived migrants using mobile technology. Journal of
Interactive Media in Education, 2017(1), 1–9.
Branch, R. M. (2009). Instructional design: The ADDIE approach. New York:
Springer.
Brand, M. (2017). Theoretical models of the development and maintenance
of Internet addiction. In C. Montag & M. Reuter (eds.), Internet addiction:
Neuroscientific approaches and therapeutical implications including smart-
phone addition (2nd ed.) (pp. 19–34). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Brantley-Dias, L. & Ertmer, P. A. (2013). Goldilocks and TPACK: Is the
construct “just right”? Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 46
(2), 103–128.
Breakwell, G. M. & Rose, D. (2006). Theory, method and research design. In
G. M. Breakwell, G., S. M. Hammond, C. Fife-Schaw & J. A. Smith (eds.),
Research methods in psychology (3rd ed.) (pp. 2–23). London: SAGE
Publications Ltd.
Brown, A. & Green, T. (2003). Showing up to class in pajamas (or less!): The
fantasies and realities of on-line professional development courses for teachers.
The Clearing House, 76(3), 148–151.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A. & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture
of learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Browne, C. & Culligan, B. (2008). Combining technology and IRT testing to
build student knowledge of high frequency vocabulary. The JALT CALL
Journal, 4(2), 3–16.
Buckingham, D. (2007). Media education: Literacy, learning and contemporary
culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Burden, K. & Kearney, M. (2018). Designing an educator toolkit for the mobile
learning age. International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 10(2),
88–99.
204 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Burnell K. & Kuther T. L. (2016). Predictors of mobile phone and social network-
ing site dependency in adulthood. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 19(10), 621–627.
Burns, T. R. & deVillé, P. (2007). Dynamic systems theory. In C. D. Bryant &
D. L. Peck (eds.), Handbook of 21st century sociology (pp. 569–582).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Burston, J. (2003). Proving it works. CALICO Journal, 20(2), 219–226.
Burston, J. (2012). Mobile-assisted language learning: A selected annotated bibli-
ography of implementation studies 1994–2012. Language Learning &
Technology, 17(3), 157–255.
Burston, J. (2015). Twenty years of MALL project implementation: A meta-
analysis of learning outcomes. ReCALL, 27(1), 4–20.
Busse, V. & Walter, C. (2013). Foreign language learning motivation in higher
education: A longitudinal study of motivational changes and their causes. The
Modern Language Journal, 97(2), 435–456.
Çakmak, F. & Erçetin, G. (2018). Effects of gloss type on text recall and incidental
vocabulary learning in mobile-assisted L2 listening. ReCALL, 30(1), 24–47.
Callon, M. (1986). The sociology of an actor-network: The case of the electric
vehicle. In M. Callon, J. Law & A. Rip (eds.), Mapping of the dynamics of
science and technology (pp. 19–34). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Canals, L. & Al-Rawashdeh, A. (2019). Teacher training and teachers’ attitudes
towards educational technology in the deployment of online English language
courses in Jordan. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 32(7), 639–664.
Carless, D. (2009). Trust, distrust and their impact on assessment reform.
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 34(1), 79–89.
Carr, N. (2011). What the internet is doing to our brains: The shallows.
New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Casper, M. (1994). Reframing and grounding nonhuman agency: What makes a
fetus an agent? American Behavioral Scientist, 37, 839–856.
Castells, M., Fernández-Ardèvol, M., Qiu, J. L. & Sey, A. (2007). Mobile com-
munication and society: A global perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cavus, C. & Ibrahim, D. (2009). M-Learning: An experiment in using SMS to
support learning new English language words. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 40(1), 78–91.
Chalhoub-Deville, M. & Deville, C. (1999). Computer adaptive testing in second
language contexts. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 19, 273–299.
Chamot, A. U. (2005). Language learning strategy instruction: Current issues and
research. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 25, 112–130.
Chapelle, C. (1989). Using intelligent computer-assisted language learning.
Computers and the Humanities, 23(1), 59–70.
Chen, C.-H., Liu, G.-Z. & Hwang, G.-J. (2015). Interaction between gaming and
multistage guiding strategies on students’ field trip mobile learning performance
and motivation. British Journal of Educational Technology, 47(6), 1032–1050.
Chen, C.-M. & Chung, C.-J. (2008). Personalized mobile English vocabulary
learning system based on item response theory and learning memory cycle.
Computers & Education, 51(2), 624–645.
References 205
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Chen, C.-M. & Li, Y.-L. (2010). Personalised context-aware ubiquitous learning
system for supporting effective English vocabulary learning. Interactive
Learning Environments, (4), 341–364.
Chen, I.-J. & Chang, C.-C. (2011). Content presentation modes in mobile
language listening tasks: English proficiency as a moderator. Computer
Assisted Language Learning, 24(5), 451–470.
Chen, X.-B. (2013). Tablets for informal language learning: Student usage and
attitudes. Language Learning & Technology, 18(1), 20–36.
Chen, Y., Carger, C. L. & Smith, T. J. (2017). Mobile-assisted narrative writing
practice for young English language learners from a funds of knowledge
approach. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 28–41.
Cheng, S., Hwang, W.-Y., Wu, S., Shadiev, R. & Xie, C. (2010). A mobile device
and online system with contextual familiarity and its effects on English learning
on campus. Educational Technology & Society, 13(3), 93–109.
Chik, A. (2020). Humorous interaction, language learning, and social media.
World Englishes, 39, 22–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/weng.12443.
Chik, A. & Breidbach, S. (2014). “Facebook me” within a global community of
learners of English: Technologizing learner autonomy. In G. Murray (ed.),
Social dimensions of autonomy in language learning (pp. 100–118).
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Chinnery, G. M. (2006). Going to the MALL: Mobile assisted language learning.
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 9–16.
Chun, D., Kern, R. & Smith, B. (2016). Technology in language use, language
teaching, and language learning, The Modern Language Journal, 100(S1),
64–80.
Churchill, D. (2013). Conceptual model design and learning uses. Interactive
Learning Environments, 21(1), 54–67.
Churchill, D., Fox, B. & King, M. (2016). Framework for designing mobile
learning environments. In D. Churchill, J. Lu, T. K. F. Chu & B. Fox (eds.),
Mobile learning design: Theories and application (pp. 3–26). Singapore:
Springer.
Coleman, J. A. (2005). CALL from the margins: Effective dissemination of CALL
research and good practices. ReCALL, 17(1), 18–31.
Collot, M. & Belmore, N. (1996). Electronic language: A new variety of English.
In S. Herring (ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and
cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 12–28). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Colpaert, J. (2006). Toward an ontological approach in goal-oriented
language courseware design and its implications for technology-independent
content structuring. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 19(2–3),
109–127.
Colpaert, J. (2010). Elicitation of learners’ personal goals as design concepts.
Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 4(3), 259–274.
Conole G. & Paredes, P .P. (2018). An analysis of adult language learning in
informal settings and the role of mobile learning. In S. Yu, M. Ally &
A. Tsinakos (eds.), Mobile and ubiquitous learning: Perspectives on rethinking
and reforming education (pp. 45–57). Singapore: Springer.
206 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Cook, V. (2016). Second language learning and language teaching (5th ed.).
Abingdon: Routledge.
Coombe, C. & Davidson, P. (2015). Constructing questionnaires. In J. D. Brown
& C. Coombe (eds.), Research in language teaching and learning (pp.
217–223). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cope, B. & Kalantzis, M. (2000). Introduction: Multiliteracies; The beginnings of
an idea. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (eds.), Multiliteracies: Literacy learning
and the design of social futures (pp. 3–8). London: Routledge.
Cortese, C. G. (2005). Learning through teaching. Management Learning, 36(1),
87–115.
Cortese, C., Pupovac, S. & Xu, L. (2019). Applying open-book-open-web assess-
ment in postgraduate accounting subject: Flipping test. In Y. A. Zhang &
D. Cristol (eds.), Handbook of mobile teaching and learning (2nd ed) (pp.
93–108). Singapore: Springer Nature.
Crompton, H. (2013). A historical overview of mobile learning: Toward learner-
centered education. In Z. L. Berge & L. Y. Muilenberg (eds.), Handbook of
mobile learning (pp. 3–14). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Crompton, H. (2016). The theory of context-aware ubiquitous learning and the
affordances of this approach for geometry learners. In D. Churchill, J. Lu,
T. K. F. Chu & B. Fox (eds.), Mobile learning design: Theories and application
(pp. 303–314). Singapore: Springer.
Crompton, H. & Traxler, J. (2018). Introduction. In H. Crompton & J. Traxler
(eds.), Mobile learning and higher education: Challenges in context (pp. 1–7).
New York: Routledge.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New
York: Harper & Row.
Cuban, L. (1993). How teachers taught: Constancy and change in American
classrooms 1890–1990. New York: Teachers College Press.
Cuban, L. (2002). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cuban, L. & Jandrić, P. (2015). The dubious promise of educational technologies:
Historical patterns and future challenges. E-Learning and Digital Media, 12
(3–4), 425–439.
Cui, Y. & Bull, S. (2005). Context and learner modelling for the mobile foreign
language learner. System, 33(2), 353–367.
Cummings, J., Sturm, M. & Avram, A. (2020). Language teaching and
settlement for newcomers in the digital age. Migration and Language
Education, 1(1). Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.29140/ile
.v1n1.261.
Cummins, J. (1998). e-Lective language learning: Design of a computer-assisted
text-based ESL/EFL learning system. TESOL Journal, 7(3), 18–21.
Cziko, G. A. & Park, S. (2003). Review of Internet audio communication for
second language learning: A comparative review of six programs. Language
Learning & Technology, 7(1), 15–27.
Darrach, B. (1970). Meet Shaky, the first electronic person. LIFE Magazine, 69
(21), 58B–68B.
References 207
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Dashti, F. A. & Aldashti, A. A. (2015). EFL college students’ attitudes towards
mobile learning. International Education Studies, 8(8), 13–20.
Davazdahemami, B., Hammer, B. & Soror, A. (2016). Addiction to mobile phone
or addiction through mobile phone? In Proceedings of the 49th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). (pp. 1467–1476).
New York: IEEE.
Davies, A. & Elder, C. (eds.). (2004). The handbook of applied linguistics.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user accept-
ance of information technologies, MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340.
de la Fuente, M. J. (2014). Learners' attention to input during focus on form
listening tasks: The role of mobile technology in the second language class-
room. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27(3), 261–276. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09588221.2012.733710.
de la Guía, E., Lopez Camacho, V., Orozco-Barbosa, L., Brea Luján, V. M.,
Penichet, V. M. R. & Lozano Pérez, M. (2016). Introducing IoT and wearable
technologies into task-based language learning for young children. IEEE
Transitions on Learning Technologies, 9(4), 366–378.
Deci, E. L. & Moller, A. C. (2007). The concept of competence: A starting place
for understanding intrinsic motivation and self-determined extrinsic motiv-
ation. In C. S. Dweck & A. J. Elliot (eds.), Handbook of competence and
motivation (pp. 579–592). New York: Guilford Press.
Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in
human behaviour. New York: Plenum.
Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (eds.). (2009). Handbook of self-determination.
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Delcker, J., Honal, A. & Ifenthaler, D. (2018). Mobile device usage in higher
education. In D. Sampson, D. Ifenthaler, J. M. Spector & P. Isaías (eds.),
Digital technologies: Sustainable innovations for improving teaching and
learning (pp. 45–56). Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Demouy, V., Jones, A., Kan, Q., Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Eardley, A. (2016). Why
and how do distance learners use mobile devices for language learning? The
EuroCALL Review, 24(1), 10–24.
Dewan, P. (2019). Reading in the age of continuous partial attention: Retail-
inspired ideas for academic libraries. Reference & User Services Quarterly,
58(3), 177–187.
Dick, W., Carey, L. & Carey, J.O. (2005). The systematic design of instruction.
New York: Pearson.
Dikkers, S. M. (2014) The future of mobile media for learning. In C. Miller &
A. Doering (eds.), The new landscape of mobile learning: Redesigning educa-
tion in an app-based world (pp. 103–119). New York: Routledge.
Dörnyei, Z. (2001). Teaching & learning motivation. Harlow: Longman.
Dörynei, Z. (2003). Questionnaires in second language research: Construction,
administration and processing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dörnyei, Z. (2017). Conceptualizing learner characteristics in a complex,
dynamic world. In L. Ortega & Z. Han (eds.), Complexity theory and
208 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
language: In celebration of Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 79–96). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Dörnyei, Z. & Kubanyiova, M. (2014). Motivating learners, motivating teachers:
Building vision in the language classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dörnyei, Z., MacIntyre, P. D. & Henry, A. (eds.). (2015). Motivational dynamics
in language learning. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Dörnyei, Z., Muir, C. & Henry, A. (2016). Motivational currents in language
learning: Frameworks for focused intervention. New York: Routledge.
Dörnyei, Z., Muir, C. & Ibrahim, Z. (2014). Energising language learning by
creating intense emotional pathways. In D. Lasagabaster, A. Doiz & J. M.
Sierra (eds.), Motivation and foreign language learning: From theory to prac-
tice (pp. 9–30). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dörnyei, Z. & Ushioda, E. (2011). Teaching & learning motivation (2nd ed.).
Harlow: Longman.
Doughty, C. (1987). Relating second-language theory to CALL research and applica-
tion. In W. F. Smith (ed.), Modern media in foreign language education: Theory and
implementation (pp. 133–167). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Co.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: The foundations of embedded interaction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ducate, L. & Lomicka, L. (2013). Going mobile: Language learning with an iPod
Touch in intermediate French and German classes. Foreign Language Annals,
46(3), 445–468.
Dudeney, G., Hockly, N. & Pegrum, M. (2013). Digital literacies. Harlow, Essex:
Pearson.
Duff, P. A. (2012). Second language socialization. In A. Duranti, E. Ochs & B. B.
Schieffelin (eds.), The handbook of language socialization (pp. 564–586).
Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Duman, G., Orhon, G. & Gedik, N. (2015). Research trends in mobile assisted
language learning from 2000 to 2012. ReCALL, 27(2), 197–216.
Dunkel, P. A. (1987). Computer-assisted instruction (CAI) and computer-assisted
language learning CALL): Past dilemmas and future prospects for audible
CALL. The Modern Language Journal, 71(3), 250–260.
Dunn, J. (2017, March 3). People are holding onto their smartphones longer.
Business Insider. Retrieved from www.businessinsider.com/how-long-people-
wait-to-upgrade-phones-chart-2017-3.
Eccles J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M., Meece, J. L. &
Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. T.
Spence (ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Egbert, J. (2005). Conducting research on CALL. In J. Egbert & G. M. Petrie (eds.),
CALL research perspectives (pp. 3–8). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Eilertsen, T. V. & Valdermo, O. (2000). Open-book assessment: A contribution
to improved learning? Studies in Educational Evaluation, 26, 91–103.
Ellis, N. C. & Larsen-Freeman, D. (eds.). (2009). Language as a complex
adaptive system. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
References 209
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Ellis, R. (1990). Researching classroom language learning. In C. Brumfit &
R. Mitchell (eds.), Research in the language classroom (pp. 54–70). London:
Modern English Publications.
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ellis, R. (2012). Language teaching research & language pedagogy. Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Ellis, R. (2015). Understanding second language acquisition (2nd ed.). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R., Skehan, P., Li, S., Shintani, N. & Lambert, C. (2020). Task-based
language teaching: Theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
El Shaban, A. & Egbert, J. (2018). Diffusing education technology:
A model for language teacher professional development in CALL. System,
78, 234–244.
Ertmer, P. A., Gopalakrishnan, S. & Ross, E. M. (2001). Technology-using
teachers: Comparing perceptions of exemplary technology use to best practice.
Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 33(5). Retrieved from www
.iste.org/jrte/33/5/ertmer.html.
Ertmer, P. A. & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. (2010). Teacher technology change:
How knowledge, confidence, beliefs, and culture intersect. Journal of Research
on Technology in Education, 42(3), 255–284.
Ertmer, P. A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., Sadik, O., Sendurur, E. & Sendurur, P.
(2012). Teacher beliefs and technology integration practices: A critical rela-
tionship. Computers and Education, 59, 423–435.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003). In two minds: Dual process accounts of reasoning.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 454–459.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and
social cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 255–278.
Fageeh, A. I. (2015). EFL student and faculty perceptions of and attitudes towards
online testing in the medium of Blackboard: Promises and challenges. The
JALT CALL Journal, 11(1), 41–62.
Fang, Z. (1996). A review of research on teacher beliefs and practices.
Educational Research, 38(1), 47–65.
Farazmand, A. (2016). Studying crisis and emergency management using global
cases of best and worst practices. In A. Farazmand (ed.), Global cases in best
and worst practice in crisis and emergency management (pp. 1–15). Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Fazzi, F. & Lasagabaster, D. (2020). Learning beyond the classroom: Students’
attitudes towards the integration of CLIL and museum-based pedagogies.
Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching. Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2020.1714630.
Felix, U. (2005). What do meta-analyses tell us about CALL effectiveness?
ReCALL, 17(2), 269–288.
210 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Fellner, T. & Apple, M. (2006). Developing writing fluency and lexical complexity
with blogs. The JALT CALL Journal, 2(1), 15–26.
Feng, Y. & Webb, S. (2019). Learning vocabulary through reading, listening and
viewing: Which mode of input is the most effective? Studies in Second
Language Acquisition. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0272263119000494.
Fenwick T. & Edwards, R. (2010). Actor-network theory in education.
Abingdon: Routledge.
Feryok, A. (2010). Language teacher cognitions: Complex dynamic systems?
System, 38(2), 272–279.
Fife-Schaw, C. (2006). Questionnaire design. In G. M. Breakwell, G. S. M.
Hammond, C. Fife-Schaw & J. A. Smith (eds.), Research methods in psych-
ology (3rd ed.) (pp. 210–231). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Fischer, R. (2012). Diversity in learner usage patterns. In G. Stockwell (ed.),
Computer-assisted language learning: Diversity in research and practice (pp.
14–32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fisher, L., Evans, M. J. & Esch, E. (2004). Computer-mediated communication:
Promoting learner autonomy and intercultural understanding at secondary
level. Language Learning Journal, 30(1), 50–58.
Fitzgerald, D., Hattie, J. & Hughes, P. (1985). Computer applications in
Australian classrooms. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.
Retrieved October 3, 2017 from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED314020.pdf.
Flanigan, A. & Kiewra, K. (2018). What college instructors can do about cyber-
slacking. Educational Psychology Review, 30(2), 585–597.
Følstad, A. & Taylor, C. (2020). Conversational repair in chatbots for customer
service: The effect of expressing uncertainty and suggesting alternatives. In A.
Følstad, R. Araujo, S. Papadopoulos, E. L.-C. Law, O. C. Granmo, E. Luger &
P. B. Brandtzaeg (eds.). Chatbot Research and Design Third International
Workshop, CONVERSATIONS 2019, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
November 19–20, 2019, Revised Selected Papers (pp. 201–214). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer.
Fornara, F. & Lomicka, L. (2019). Using visual social media in language learning
to investigage the role of social presence. CALICO Journal, 36(3), 184–203.
Freeth, M., Foulsham, T. & Kingstone, A. (2013) What affects social attention?
Social presence, eye contact and autistic traits. PLoS ONE 8(1), e53286.
Retrieved from https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053286.
Fried, C. B. (2008). In-class laptop use and its effects on student learning.
Computers and Education, 50, 906–914.
Friedman, D. A. (2008). How to collect and analyze qualitative data. In A.
Mackey & S. M. Gass (eds.), Research methods in second language acquisi-
tion: A practical guide (pp. 180–200). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Friedman, T. L. (2006, July 5). The age of interruption. New York Times.
Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2006/07/05/opinion/05friedman.html.
Friðriksdóttir, K. (2018). The impact of different modalities on student retention
and overall engagement patterns in open online courses, Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 31(1–2), 53–71.
References 211
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Fryer, L. K. & Carpenter, R. (2006). Bots as language learning tools. Language,
Learning & Technology, 10(3), 8–14.
Fryer, L. K., Nakao, K. & Thompson, A. (2019). Chatbot learning partners:
Connecting learning experiences, interest and competence. Computers in
Human Behavior, 93, 279–289.
Gabe, G. (2019, July 2). Google’s core algorithm updates and the power of
user studies: How real feedback from real people can help site owners
surface website quality problems (and more). G-Squared Interactive.
Retrieved from www.gsqi.com/marketing-blog/google-core-ranking-updates-
user-studies/.
Galletly, J. E., Butcher, C. W. & Lim How, J. (1989). In K. Cameron (ed.),
Computer assisted language learning: Program structure and principles (pp.
81–100). Oxford: Intellect Limited.
Galluch, P. S., Long, C., Bratton, T., Gee, M. & Groeber, M. (2009). Losing
the battle: Student and instructor perspectives on attention loss in the class-
room. In C. F. Rogers (ed.), Proceedings of the Southern Association for
Information Systems Conference (pp. 45–50). Cambridge, MA: Academic
Press.
Galperin, H. (2016). How to connect to the other half: Evidence and policy
insights from household surveys in South America (ed.), The shifting geopolit-
ics of Internet access: From broadband and Net neutrality to zero-rating (pp.
5–36). London: Chatham House.
Gan, J. & Zhong, L. (2016). Empirical research on the influencing factors of
mobile foreign language learning based on UTAUT model. Journal of
Computational and Theoretical Nanoscience, 13(10), 7526–7532.
García, O. & Li, W. (2014). Translanguaging: Language, bilingualism, and
education. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gao, X. (2010). Strategic language learning: The roles of agency and context.
Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
García Botero, G., Botero Restrepo, M. A., Chang, Z. & Questier, F. (2019):
Complementing in-class language learning with voluntary out-of-class MALL:
Does training in self-regulation and scaffolding make a difference? Computer
Assisted Language Learning. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10
.1080/09588221.2019.1650780.
García-Peñalvo, F. J. & Alier Forment, M. (2014). Learning management system:
Evolving from silos to structures. Interactive Learning Environments, 22(2),
143–145.
Gardner, R. C. (1985). Social psychology and second language learning: The role
of attitudes and motivation. London: Edward Arnold.
Gardner, R. C. & Lambert, W. E. (1972). Motivational variables in second
language acquisition. In R. C. Gardner & W. Lambert (eds.), Attitudes and
motivation in second language learning (pp. 119–216). Rowley, MA: Newbury
House.
Gardner, R. C. & MacIntyre, P. D. (1991). An instrumental motivation in
language study: Who says it isn’t effective? Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 13(1), 57–72.
212 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Garrett, P. B. & Baquedano-López, P. (2002). Language socialization:
Reproduction and continuity, transformation and change. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 31, 339–361.
Garrison, D. & Vaughan, N. (2008). Blended learning in higher education:
Framework, principles, and guidelines. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gartner. (2016). Gartner hype cycle. Retrieved from www.gartner.com/technol
ogy/research/methodologies/hype-cycle.jsp.
Gass, S. M. & Mackey, A. (2009). Stimulated recall methodology in second
language research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gaved, M., Jones, A., Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Scanlon, E. (2012). A citizen-
centred approach to education in the smart city: Incidental language learning
for supporting the inclusion of recent migrants. International Journal of Digital
Literacy and Digital Competence, 3(4), 50–64.
George, A. L. & Bennett, A. (2004). Case studies and theory development in the
social sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ghorbani, N. & Ebadi, S. (2019). Exploring learners’ grammatical development
in mobile assisted language learning, Cogent Education, 6(1). https://doi.org/
10.1080/2331186X.2019.1704599.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (2015). The ecological approach to visual perception (Classic
Edition). New York: Psychology Press.
Gillwald, A. (2017). Beyond access: Addressing digital inequality in Africa. In
Centre for International Governance (ed.), The shifting geopolitics of Internet
access: From broadband and Net neutrality to zero-rating (pp. 37–54).
London: Chatham House.
Glover, I. & Rodger, H. (2018). The death of “mobile learning.” In
H. Crompton & J. Traxler (eds.), Mobile learning and higher education:
Challenges in context (pp. 82–91). New York: Routledge.
Godwin-Jones, R. (2010). From memory palaces to spacing algorithms:
Approaches to second-language vocabulary learning. Language Learning &
Technology, 14(2), 4–11.
Godwin-Jones, R. (2016). Augmented reality and language learning: From anno-
tated vocabulary to place-based mobile games. Language Learning &
Technology, 20(3), 9–19.
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018). Chasing the butterfly effect: Informal language learning
online as a complex system. Language Learning & Technology, 22(2), 8–27.
Grabe, W. (2009). Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gregg, K. (2010). Review article: Shallow draughts; Larsen-Freeman and
Cameron on complexity. Second Language Research, 26(4), 549–560.
Grimshaw, J., Cardoso, W. & Collins, L. (2017). Teacher perspectives on the
integration of mobile-assisted language learning. In K. Borthwick, L. Bradley &
S. Thouësny (eds.), CALL in a climate of change: Adapting to turbulent global
conditions; Short papers from EuroCALL 2017 (pp. 135–139). Research-pub-
lishing.net. https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2017.eurocall2017.702.
References 213
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Grin, J., Rotmans, J. & Schot, J. (2010). Transitions to sustainable development:
New directions in the study of long-term transformative change. New York:
Routledge.
Gromik, N. A. (2012). Cell phone video recording feature as a language learning
tool: A case study. Computers & Education, 58(1), 223–230.
GSMA Intelligence. (2019). Definitive data and analysis for the mobile industry.
Retrieved from www.gsmaintelligence.com/.
Gu, J. (2016). Understanding self-directed learning in the context of mobile Web
2.0: Case study with workplace learners. Interactive Learning Environments,
24(1), 306–316.
Gu, X., Gu, F. & Laffey, J. M. (2011). Designing a mobile system for lifelong
learning on the move. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(3), 204–215.
Gunawardena, C. N., Palalas, A., Berezin, N., Legere, C., Kramer, G. & Amo-
Kwao, G. (2016). Negotiating cultural spaces in an international mobile and
blended learning project. In L. E. Dyson, W. Ng & J. Fergusson (eds.), Mobile
learning futures: Sustaining quality research and practice in mobile learning
(pp. 83–94). Sydney: The University of Technology, Sydney.
Guthrie, J. & Wigfield, A. (2000). Engagement and motivation in reading. In M.
Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson & R. Barr (eds.), Handbook of reading
research (vol. 3, pp. 403–322). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hafner, C. A. (2014). Embedding digital literacies in English language teaching:
Students’ digital video projects as multimodal ensembles. TESOL Quarterly,
48(4), 655–685.
Hafner, C. A. & Miller, L. (2011). Fostering learner autonomy in English for
science: A collaborative digital video project in a technological learning envir-
onment. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 68–86.
Halmdienst, N., Radhuber, M. & Winter-Ebmer, R. (2019). Attitudes of elderly
Austrians towards new technologies: Communication and entertainment
versus health and support use. European Journal of Ageing, 16, 513–523.
Han, Y. J. (2015). Successfully flipping the ESL classroom for EFL autonomy.
NYS TESOL Journal, 2(1), 98–102.
Hanna, D. E., Brown, G., Dede, C., Olcott, D., Poley, J., Schmidt, K. & Tallman,
J. (2000). Higher education in an era of digital competition: Choices and
challenges. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing Co.
Hanson, B. G. (1995). General systems theory: Beginning with wholes. New
York: Taylor & Francis.
Hauck, M. & Kurek, M. (2017). Digital literacies in teacher preparation. In S.
Thorne & S. May (eds.), Language, education and technology, Encyclopedia
of language and education (3rd ed.) (pp. 275–288). Cham, Switzerland:
Springer.
Heift, T. & Caws, C. (2014). Constructing a data-driven learning tool with
recycled learning data. Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching,
4(4), 76–89.
Heijne-Penninga, M., Kuks, J. B. M., Schonrock-Adema, J., Snijders, T. A. B. &
Cohen-Schotanus, J. (2008). Open-book tests to complement assessment-
214 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
programmes: Analysis of open and closed-book tests. Advances in Health
Sciences Education, 13(3), 263–273.
Heo, H., Lim, K. Y. & Kim, Y. (2010). Exploratory study on the patterns of
online interaction and knowledge co-construction in project-based learning.
Computers & Education, 55(3), 1383–1392.
Higgins, J. & Johns, T. (1984). Computers in language learning. London: Collins.
Hiver, P. & Al-Hoorie, A. H. (2020). Research methods for complexity theory
in applied linguistics. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Hodges, C., Moore, S., Lockee, B., Trust, T. & Bond, A. (2020, March 27). The
difference between emergency remote teaching and online learning.
EDUCAUSE Review. Retrieved from https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/
the-difference-between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning.
Hoffman, R. (1994). Powerful, personal: Electronic mail and the L2 writing
process. ReCALL, 6(2), 53–62.
Hohenberger, A. & Peltzer-Karpf, A. (2009). Language learning from the perspec-
tive of nonlinear dynamic systems. Linguistics, 47(2), 481–511.
Hois J., Theofanou-Fuelbier D. & Junk A. J. (2019). How to achieve explain-
ability and transparency in human AI interaction. In C. Stephanidis (ed.), HCI
International 2019 – Posters. HCII 2019. Communications in Computer and
Information Science, Vol. 1033 (pp. 177–183). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Holden, C. & Sykes, J. (2011). Leveraging mobile games for place-based language
learning. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 1–18.
Holec, H. (1981). Foreign language learning. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Holliday, A. (2003). Social autonomy: Addressing the dangers of culturism in
TESOL. In D. Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (eds.), Learner autonomy across
cultures: Language education perspectives (pp. 110–128). Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Hong, J.-C., Hwang, M. Y., Tai, K.-H. & Lin, P.-H. (2019). The effects of
intrinsic cognitive load and gameplay interest on flow experience reflecting
performance progress in a Chinese remote association game. Computer
Assisted Language Learning. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10
.1080/09588221.2019.1614068.
Hong, J. S., Han, D. H., Kim, Y. I., Bae, S. J., Kim, S. M. & Renshaw, P. (2017).
English language education on-line game and brain connectivity. ReCALL, 29
(1), 3–21.
Hsieh, W.-M. & Tsai, C.-C. (2017). Taiwanese high school teachers’ conceptions
of mobile learning. Computers & Education, 115, 82–95.
Hsu, C.-K., Hwang, G.-J. & Chang, C.-K. (2013). A personalized
recommendation-based mobile learning approach to improving the reading
performance of EFL students. Computers & Education, 63, 327–336.
Hsu, L. (2013). English as a foreign language learners’ perception of mobile
assisted language learning: A cross-national study. Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 26(3), 197–213.
Hsu, L. (2016). Examining EFL teachers’ technological pedagogical content
knowledge and the adoption of mobile-assisted language learning: A partial
References 215
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
least square approach. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(8),
1287–1297.
Hu, Z. & McGrath, I. (2011). Innovation in higher education in China: Are
teachers ready to integrate ICT in English language teaching? Technology,
Pedagogy and Education, 20(1), 41–59.
Huang, C. S. J., Yang, S. J. H., Chiang, T. H. C. & Su, A. Y. S. (2016). Effects of
situated mobile learning approach on learning motivation and performance of
EFL students. Educational Technology & Society, 19(1), 263–276.
Huang, L.-L. & Lin, C.-C. (2011). EFL learners’ reading on mobile phones. The
JALT CALL Journal, 7(1), 61–78.
Huang, T.-C., Chen, C.-C. & Chou, Y.-W. (2016). Animating eco-education: To
see, feel, and discover in an augmented reality-based experiential learning
environment. Computers & Education, 96, 72–82.
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C.
Browne (eds.), New perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms
(pp. 45–68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hubbard, P. (2005). A review of subject characteristics in CALL research.
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 351–368.
Hubbard, P. (2008). Twenty-five years of theory in the CALICO Journal.
CALICO Journal, 25(3), 387–399.
Hubbard, P. (2009). Developing CALL theory: A new frontier. In M. Thomas
(ed.). New frontiers in CALL: Negotiating diversity (pp. 1–6). Nagoya: JALT
CALL SIG.
Hubbard, P. (2013). Making a case for learner training in technology enhanced
language learning environments. CALICO Journal, 30(2), 163–178. https://
doi.org/10.11139/cj.30.2.163-178.
Hubbard, P. (2020). Levering technology to integrate informal language learning
within classroom settings. In M. Dressman & R. W. Sadler (eds.), The hand-
book of informal language learning (pp. 405–419). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons.
Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (2006). The scope of CALL education. In P. Hubbard &
M. Levy (eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 2–20). Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (2016). Theory in computer-assisted language
learning research and practice. In F. Farr & L. Murray (eds.), Routledge
handbook of language learning and technology (pp. 24–38). New York:
Taylor & Francis.
Hui, C. H. & Triandis, H. C. (1989). Effects of culture and response format on
extreme response style. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 20, 296–309.
Hutchins, E. (1991). The social organization of distributed cognition. In L. B.
Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley (eds.), Perspectives on socially shared
cognition (p. 283–307). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Hwang, G. J., Lai, C. L. & Wang, S. Y. (2015). Seamless flipped learning:
A mobile technology-enhanced flipped classroom with effective learning strat-
egies. Journal of Computers in Education, 2(4), 449–473.
216 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Hwang, G. J. & Wu, P.-H. (2014). Applications, impacts and trends of mobile
technology-enhanced learning: A review of 2008–2012 publications in selected
SSCI journals. International Journal of Mobile Learning and Organisation, 8
(2), 83–95.
Hwang, W.-Y., Shih, T. K., Ma, Z.-H., Shadiev, R. & Chen, S.-Y. (2016).
Evaluating listening and speaking skills in a mobile game-based learning
environment with situational contexts. Computer Assisted Language
Learning, 29(4), 639–657.
Im, I., Hong, S. & Kang, M. S. (2011). An international comparison of technology
adoption testing the UTAUT model. Information & Management, 48(1), 1–8.
Imlah, W. G. & du Boulay, J. B. H. (1985). Robust natural language parsing in
computer-assisted instruction. System, 13(2), 137–147.
Isikoglu, N., Basturk, R. & Karaca, F. (2009). Assessing in-service teachers’
instructional beliefs about student-centered education: A Turkish perspective.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 25, 350–356.
Israel, M. & Hay, I. (2006). Research ethics for social scientists: Between ethical
conduct and regulatory compliance. London: SAGE Publications.
Järvelä, S., Näykki, P., Laru, J. & Luokkanen., T. (2007). Structuring and
Regulating Collaborative Learning in Higher Education. Educational
Technology & Society, 10(4), 71–79.
Jitpaisarnwattana, N., Reinders, H. & Darasawang, P. (2019). Language
MOOCs: An expanding field. Technology in Language Teaching &
Learning, 1(1), 21–32.
Karlström, P. & Lundin, E. (2013). CALL in the zone of proximal development:
Novelty effects and teacher guidance. Computer Assisted Language Learning,
26(5), 412–429.
Kassem, M. A. M. (2018). The effect of a suggested in-service teacher training
program based on mall applications on developing EFL students’ vocabulary
acquisition. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 9(2), 250–260.
Kaufman, D. (2004). Constructivist issues in language learning and teaching.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24, 303–319.
Kawahara, H. (2010). Student authentication for course credit in distance learn-
ing. Journal of Multimedia Education Research, 7(1), S57–S63.
Kawahara, H., Nogimori, M., Matsumoto, S. (2015). Maximizing study hours
with cloud-based and mobile-based e-learning. In M. Ally & B. H. Khan
(eds.), International handbook of e-learning, Volume 2: Implementation and
case studies (pp. 211–221). New York: Routledge.
Kearney, M., Burke, P. F. & Schuck, S. (2019). The iPAC scale: A survey to
measure distinctive mobile pedagogies. TechTrends, 63, 751–764.
Kearney, M., Schuck, S., Burden, K. & Aubusson, P. (2012). Viewing mobile
learning from a pedagogical perspective. Research in Learning Technology, 20.
https://doi.org/10.3402/rlt.v20i0.14406.
Kemp, J. & Smellie, D. (1994). Planning, producing, and using instructional
technologies (7th ed.). New York: Harper Collins Publishers.
Kennedy, C. & Levy, M. (2008). L’italiano al telefonino: Using SMS to support
beginners’ language learning. ReCALL, 20(3), 315–330.
References 217
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Kessler, G. (2007). Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitudes
toward technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(2), 173–188.
Kessler, G. & Hubbard, P. (2017). Language teacher education and technology.
In C. A. Chapelle & S. Sauro (eds.), The handbook of technology and second
language teaching and learning (pp. 278–292). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.
Khamparia, A. & Pandey, B. (2020). Association of learning styles with different
e-learning problems: A systematic review and classification. Education and
Information Technology, 25, 1303–1331. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-
019-10028-y.
Kiernan, P. J. & Aizawa, K. (2004). Cell phones in task-based learning: Are cell
phones useful language learning tools? ReCALL, 16(1), 71–84.
Kim, D., Rueckert, D., Kim, D.-J. & Seo, D. (2013). Students’ perceptions and
experiences of mobile learning. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3),
52–73.
Kim, G. (2017). Effects of mobile-assisted pre-listening activities and listening
strategy training on EFL students’ listening comprehension skill and strategy
use. Secondary English Education, 10(4), 47–70.
Kim, H. (2013). What to consider for effective mobile-assisted language learning:
Design implications from an empirical analysis. In Global perspectives on
computer-assisted language learning: Proceedings of the WorldCALL 2013
Conference (pp. 138–140). Ulster, UK: University of Ulster. Retrieved from
http://arts.ulster.ac.uk/worldcall2013/userfiles/file/shortpapers.pdf.
Kim, H. & Kwon, Y. (2012). Exploring smartphone applications for effective
mobile-assisted language learning. Multimedia-Assisted Language Learning,
15(1), 31–57.
Kim, H.-S. (2011). Effects of SMS text messaging on vocabulary learning.
Multimedia-Assisted Language Learning, 14(2), 159–180.
Kim, N.-Y. (2017). A study on different types of speech acts in voice-chat between
EFL students and a chatbot. Studies in English Education, 22(3), 81–109.
Kim, N.-Y. (2019). A study on the use of artificial intelligency chatbots for
improving English grammar skills. Journal of Digital Convergence, 17(8),
37–46.
Kim, S.-K. & Lim, K. (2010). A case study on the effects of microblogging as
a learning activity to enhance ESL students’ cultural knowledge and
motivation to write in English. Multimedia-Assisted Language Learning, 13
(3), 155–174.
Kitade, K. (2006). The negotiation model in asynchronous computer-mediated
communication (CMC): Negotiation in task-based email exchanges. CALICO
Journal, 23(2), 319–348.
Knappett, C. & Malafouris, L. (2008). Material and nonhuman agency: An
introduction. In C. Knappett & L. Malafouris (eds.), Material agency:
Towards a non-anthropocentric approach (pp. ix–xix). New York: Springer.
Koenraad, T. (2019). Pedagogical frameworks and principles for mobile (lan-
guage) learning to support related teacher education. In F. Meunier, J. Van
de Vyver, L. Bradley & S. Thouesney (eds.), CALL and complexity: Short
218 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
papers from EUROCALL 2019 (pp. 229–235). Research-publishing.net.
https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2019.38.1014.
Kondo, M., Ishikawa, Y., Smith, C., Sakamoto, K., Shimomura, H. & Wada, N.
(2012). Mobile assisted language learning in university EFL courses in Japan:
Developing attitudes and skills for self-regulated learning. ReCALL, 24(2),
169–187.
Koole, M. (2009). A model for framing mobile learning. In M. Ally (ed.), Mobile
learning: Transforming the delivery of education & training (pp. 25–47).
Athabasca: AU Press.
Kramsch, C. (2002). Introduction. In C. Kramsch (ed.), Language acquisition and
language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp. 1–30). London:
Continnum.
Kramsch, C. (2015). Applied linguistics: A theory of the practice. Applied
Linguistics, 36(4), 454–465.
Krashen, S. (1981). Second language acquisition and second language learning.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary
communication. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. & Pachler, N. (2007). Thinking about the “m” in m-learning. In N.
Pachler (ed.), Mobile learning: Towards a research agenda (pp. 7–32). London:
WLE Centre, Institute of Education.
Krug, S. (2014). Don’t make me think revisited: A common sense approach to
web and mobile usability (3rd ed.). San Francisco: New Riders.
Kuhn, G., Teszka, R., Tenaw, N. & Kingstone, A. (2016). Don’t be fooled!
Attentional responses to social cues in a face-to-face and video magic trick
reveals greater top-down control for overt than covert attention. Cognition,
146, 136–142.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2013). Mobile-assisted language learning. In C. Chapelle
(ed.), The encyclopedia of applied linguistics (pp. 3701–3709). New York:
Wiley.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2015). Language as a bridge connecting formal and infor-
mal learning through mobile devices. In Wong, L.-H. & Specht, M. (eds.),
Seamless learning in the age of mobile connectivity (pp. 281–294). Singapore:
Springer.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2016). Personalization of language learning through mobile
technologies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kukulska-Hulme, A., Gaved, M., Paletta, L., Scanlon, E., Jones, A. & Brasher, A.
(2015). Mobile incidental learning to support the inclusion of recent immi-
grants. Ubiquitous Learning: An International Journal, 7(2), 9–21.
Kukulska-Hulme A. & Lee, H. (2020). Mobile collaboration for language learn-
ing and cultural learning. In M. Dressman & R. W. Sadler (eds.), The hand-
book of informal language learning (pp. 169–180). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley
Blackwell.
Kukulska-Hulme, A., Lee, H. & Norris, L. (2017). Mobile learning revolution:
Implications for language pedagogy. In C. A. Chapelle & S. Sauro (eds.), The
References 219
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
handbook of technology and second language teaching and learning (pp.
217–233). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Shield, L. (2008). An overview of mobile assisted lan-
guage learning: From content delivery to supported collaboration and inter-
action. ReCALL, 20(3), 271–289.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Traxler, J. (2005). Mobile teaching and learning. In
A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler (eds.), Mobile learning: A handbook for
educators and trainers (pp. 25–44). Abingdon: Routledge.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Viberg, O. (2018). Mobile collaborative language learn-
ing: State of the art. British Journal of Educational Technology, 49(2),
207–218.
Kurek, M. & Hauck, M. (2014). Closing the digital divide: A framework for
multiliteracy training. In J. Pettes Guikema & L. Williams (eds.), Digital
literacies in foreign and second language education: Research, perspectives,
and best practice (pp. 119–140). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Lai, A. (2016). Mobile immersion: An experiment using mobile instant messenger
to support second-language learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 24
(2), 277–290.
Lai, C. (2019). Technology and learner autonomy: An argument in favour of the
nexus between formal and informal learning. Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics, 39, 52–58.
Lai, C. & Morrison, B. (2013). Towards an agenda for learner preparation in
technology-enhanced language learning environments. CALICO Journal, 30
(2), 154–162.
Lai, C., Shum, M. & Tian, Y. (2016). Enhancing learners’ self-directed use of
technology for language learning: The effectiveness of an online training plat-
form. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(1), 40–60.
Lai, C., Wang, Q., Li, X. & Hu, X. (2016). The influence of individual espoused
cultural values on self-directed use of technology for language learning beyond
the classroom. Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 676–688.
Lai, C. & Zheng D. (2018). Self-directed use of mobile devices for language
learning beyond the classroom. ReCALL, 30(3), 299–318.
Lamb, M. (2017). The motivational dimension of language teaching. Language
Teaching, 50(3), 301–346.
Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Introduction to the special issue. Modern Language Journal,
78, 418–420.
Lantolf, J. P. & Pavlenko, A. (1995). Sociocultural theory and second language
acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 15, 108–124.
Lantolf, J. P. & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of
second language development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos/complexity science and second language
acquisition. Applied Linguistics, 46(4), 713–749.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2002). Language acquisition and language use from a chaos/
complexity theory perspective. In C. Kramsch (ed.), Language acquisition and
220 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp. 33–46). London:
Continuum.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2015). Ten “lessons” from complex dynamic systems theory:
What is on offer. In Z. Dörnyei, P. D. MacIntyre & A. Henry (eds.),
Motivation dynamics in language learning (pp. 11–19). Bristol: Multilingual
Matters.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2017). Complexity theory: The lessons continue. In
L. Ortega & Z. Han (eds.), Complexity theory and language: In celebration
of Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 11–50). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D. & Cameron, L. (2008). Complex systems and applied lin-
guistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers
through society. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Lauricella, S. & Kay, R. H. (2010). Assessing laptop use in higher education
classrooms: The laptop effectiveness scale (LES). Australian Journal of
Educational Technology, 26(2), 151–163.
Laurillard, D. (2002). Rethinking university teaching: A conversational frame-
work for the effective use of learning technologies (2nd ed.). London:
RoutledgeFalmer.
Laurillard, D. (2007). Pedagogical forms of mobile learning: Framing research
questions. In N. Pachler (ed.), Mobile learning: Towards a research agenda (pp.
153–176). London: WLE Centre, Institute of Education.
Laurillard, D. (2012). Teaching as a design science: Building pedagogical patterns
for learning and technology. Abingdon: Routledge.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participa-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1995). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participa-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Law, J. (1994). Organizing modernity: Social ordering and social theory. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Lawrence, G. (2014). The role of teachers and their beliefs in implementing
technology-mediated language learning: Implications for teacher development
and research. International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning
and Teaching, 4(4), 59–75.
Leakey, J. (2011). Evaluating computer-assisted language learning: An integrated
approach to effectiveness research in CALL. Bern: Peter Lang.
Lee, H., Hampel, R. & Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2019). Gesture in speaking
tasks beyond the classroom: An exploration of the multimodal negotiation
of meaning via Skype videoconferencing on mobile devices. System, 81, 26–38.
Lee, S.-Y., Lo, Y.-H.G. & Chin, T.-C. (2019). Practicing multiliteracies to enhance
EFL learners’ meaning making process and language development: A multimodal
problem-based approach. Computer Assisted Language Learning. Advance online
publication. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1614959.
Legris, P., Ingham, J. & Collerette, P. (2003). Why do people use information
technology? A critical review of the technology acceptance model. Information
& Management, 40(3), 191–204.
References 221
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Leis, A. (2014). Encouraging autonomy through the use of a social networking
system. The JALT CALL Journal, 10(1), 69–80.
Lejonberg, E., Elstad, E. & Christophersen, K. A. (2018). Teaching evaluation:
Antecedents of teachers’ perceived usefulness of follow-up sessions and per-
ceived stress related to the evaluation process. Teachers and Teaching, 24(3),
281–296.
Leonardi, P. M. (2012). Materiality, sociomateriality, and socio-technical systems:
What do these terms mean? How are they different? Do we need them? In
P. M. Leonardi, B. A. Nardi & J. Kallinkos (eds.), Materiality and organising:
Social interaction in a technical world (pp. 25–48). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Leung, C. & Scarino, A. (2016). Reconceptualizing the nature of goals and
outcomes in language/s education. The Modern Language Journal, 100 (S1),
81–95.
Levy, M. (1997). Computer-assisted language learning: Context and conceptual-
ization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levy, M. (2002). CALL by design: Discourse, products and processes. ReCALL,
14(1), 58–84.
Levy, M. & Hubbard, P. (2005). Why call CALL CALL? Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 18(3), 143–149.
Levy, M. & Steel, C. (2015). Language learner perspectives on the functionality
and use of electronic language dictionaries. ReCALL, 27(2), 177–196.
Levy, M. & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in
computer assisted language learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Lewis, T. (2014). Exploring the social dimensions of autonomy in language
learning. In G. Murray (ed.), Social dimensions of autonomy in language
learning (pp. 3–11). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Li, J. (2018). Digital affordances on WeChat: Learning Chinese as a second
language. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(1–2), 27–52.
Li, W. (2018). Translanguaging as a practical theory of language. Applied
Linguistics, 39(1), 9–30.
Li, Z. & Hegelheimer, V. (2013). Mobile-assisted grammar exercises: Effects on
self-editing in L2 writing. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 135–156.
Liaw, S.-S., Hatela, M. & Huang, H.-M. (2010). Investigating acceptance toward
mobile learning to assist individual knowledge management: Based on activity
theory approach. Computers & Education, 54(2), 446–454.
Lin, C.-C. (2014). Learning English reading in a mobile-assisted extensive reading
program. Computers & Education, 78, 48–59.
Lin, C.-C., Lin, V., Liu, G.-Z., Kou, X., Kulikova, A. & Lin. W. (2019). Mobile-
assisted reading development: A review from the Activity Theory perspective.
Computer Assisted Language Learning. Advance online publication. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1594919.
Lin, C.-C. & Yu, Y.-C. (2017). Effects of presentation modes on mobile-assisted
vocabulary learning and cognitive load. Interactive Learning Environments,
25(4), 528–542.
222 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Lin, J.-J. & Lin, H. (2019). Mobile-assisted ESL/EFL vocabulary learning:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Computer Assisted Language
Learning, 32(8), 878–919.
Lindberg, J. O., Olofsson, A. D. & Fransson, G. (2016). Contrasting views:
Student and teacher perceptions on ICT in education. The proceedings of the
International Conference on Information Communication Technologies in
Education 2016 (pp. 1–10).
Lisenbee, P. S. (2016). Generation gap between students’ needs and teachers’ use
of technology in classrooms. Journal of Literacy and Technology, 17(3),
99–123.
Little, D., Dam, L. & Legenhausen, L. (2017). Language learner autonomy:
Theory, practice and research. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Liu, H., Lin, C.-S. & Zhang, D. (2017). Pedagogical beliefs and attitudes toward
information and communication technology: A survey of teachers of English as
a foreign language in China. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(8),
745–765.
Liu, M., Navarrete, C. C. & Wivagg, J. (2014). Powering up: Insights from
distinguished mobile and ubiquitous learning projects across the world.
Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17(2), 115–126.
Liu, P.-H. E. & Tsai. M.-K. (2013). Using augmented-reality-based mobile learn-
ing material in EFL English composition: An exploratory case study. British
Journal of Educational Technology, 44(1), E1–E4.
Liu, P.-L. & Chen, C.-J. (2015). Learning English through actions: A study of
mobile-assisted language learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(2),
158–171.
Liu, S.-H. (2011). Factors related to pedagogical beliefs of teachers and technol-
ogy integration. Computers & Education, 56, 1012–1022.
Liu, T.-Y. (2009). A context-aware ubiquitous learning environment for language
listening and speaking. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(6), 515–527.
Liu, T.-Y. & Chu, Y. (2010). Using ubiquitous games in an English listening and
speaking course: Impact on learning outcomes and motivation. Computers &
Education, 55(2), 630–643.
Liu T. Y., Tan T. H. & Chu Y. L. (2010). QR code and augmented reality-
supported mobile English learning system. In X. Jiang, M. Y. Ma & C. W.
Chen (eds.), Mobile multimedia processing. WMMP 2008. Lecture notes in
computer science (pp. 37–52). Berlin: Springer.
Liu, Y. & Gu X. (2019). Media multitasking, attention, and comprehension:
A deep investigation into fragmented reading. Educational Technology
Research and Development, 68, 67–87.
Loewen, S., Crowther, D., Isbell, D. R. & Kim, K. M. (2019). Mobile-assisted
language learning: A Duolingo case study. ReCALL, 31(3), 293–311.
Long, M. (1981). Input, interaction, and second-language acquisition. Annals of
the New York Academy of Science, 379, 259–278.
Long, M. H. (1983). Native speaker/non-native speaker conversation and the
negotiation of comprehensible input. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 126–141.
https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/4.2.126.
References 223
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language
acquisition. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (eds.), Handbook of second language
acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego: Academic Press.
Lorenz, E. N. (1972, December). Predictability: Does the flap of a butterfly’s wings
in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas? Paper presented at the 139th meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, December 29,
1972, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Retrieved from
http://eaps4.mit.edu/research/Lorenz/Butterfly_1972.pdf.
Lotherington, H. & Jenson, J. (2011). Teaching multimodal and digital literacy in
L2 settings: New literacies, new basics, new pedagogies. Annual Review of
Applied Linguistics, 31, 226–246.
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of
Computer-Assisted Learning, 24(6), 515–525.
Luckin, R. (2010). Re-designing learning contexts: Technology-rich, learner-
centred ecologies. Abingdon: Routledge.
Lyddon, P. A. (2016). Mobile-assisted language learning and language learning auton-
omy. In S. Papadima-Sophocleous, L. Bradley & S. Thouësny (eds.), CALL com-
munities and culture: Short papers from EUROCALL 2016 (pp. 302–306).
Research-publishing.net https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2016.eurocall2016.579.
Lyngs, U., Lukoff, K., Slovak, P., Binns, R., Slack, A., Inzlicht, M., Van Kleek, M.
& Shadbolt, N. (2019). Self-control in cyberspace: Applying dual systems
theory to a review of digital self-control tools. In Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’19)
(pp. 1–18). New York: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3290605.3300361.
MacKay, J. (2019, March 21). Screen time stats 2019: Here’s how much you use
your phone during the workday. Rescuetime:blog. Retrieved from https://blog
.rescuetime.com/screen-time-stats-2018/.
Maier, J. R. A. & Fadel, G. M. (2009). Affordance based design: A relational
theory for design. Research in Engineering Design, 20(1), 13–27.
Marín Juarros, V., Salinas Ibáñez, J. & de Benito Crosetti, B. (2014). Research
results of two personal learning environments experiments in a higher educa-
tion institution. Interactive Learning Environments, 22(2), 205–220.
Marsick, V. J. & Watkins, K. E. (2001). Informal and incidental learning. New
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 2001 (89), 25–34.
Martin, J. (2004). Self-regulated learning, social cognitive theory, and agency.
Educational Psychologist, 39(2), 135–145.
Martín-Monje E. & Bárcena, E. (eds.). (2014). Language MOOCs: Providing
learning, transcending boundaries. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Mayer, R. E. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (ed.),
The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 31–48). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
McCoy, B. R. (2016). Digital distractions in the classroom phase 2: Student
classroom use of digital devices the non-class related purposes. Faculty publi-
cations, College of journalism and miscommunication, 90. Retrieved from
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/journalismfacpub/90.
224 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
McGroarty, M. (2001). Situating second language motivation. In Z. Dörnyei &
R. Schmidt (eds.), Motivation and second language acquisition (Technical
Report #23) (pp. 69–91). Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Second Language
Teaching and Curriculum Centre.
McPherson, M. S. & Bacow, L. S. (2015). Online higher education: Beyond the
hype cycle. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4), 135–154.
Mercer, S. (2011). Understanding learner agency as a complex dynamic system.
System, 39, 427–436.
Merriam, S. & Bierema, L. L. (2013). Adult learning: Linking theory and practice.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Mideros, D. & Carter, B. (2014). Meeting the autonomy challenge in
an advanced Spanish listening class. In G. Murray (ed.), Social dimensions
of autonomy in language learning (pp. 60–80). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Mills, K. A. (2016). Literacy theories for the digital age: Social, critical, multi-
modal, special, material and sensory lenses. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Mindog, E. (2016). Apps and EFL: A case study on the use of smartphone apps to
learn English by four Japanese students. The JALT CALL Journal, 12(1),
3–22.
Minor, L. C., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Witcher, A. E. & James, T. (2002). Preservice
teachers’ educational beliefs and their perception of characteristics of effective
teachers. The Journal of Educational Research, 96(2), 116–127.
Miralpeix, I. & Muñoz, C. (2018). Receptive vocabulary size and its relationship
to EFL language skills. International Review of Applied Linguistics in
Language Teaching, 56(1), 1–24.
Milman, N. B. (2020, March 30). This is emergency remote teaching, not just
online teaching. Education Week. Retrieved from www.edweek.org/ew/art
icles/2020/03/30/this-is-emergency-remote-teaching-not-just.html.
Mintzberg, H. (1994). The rise and fall of strategic planning. New York: The Free
Press.
Mishra, P. & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content know-
ledge: A framework for teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6),
1017–1054.
Mitchell, M. (2009). Complexity: A guided tour. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Mitchell, M. & Newman, M. (2002). Complex systems theory and evolution. In
M. Pagel (ed.), Encyclopedia of evolution (pp. 1–5). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mitchell, R., Myles, F. & Marsden, E. (2013). Second language learning theories
(3rd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Moghari, M. H. & Marandi, S. S. (2017). Triumph through texting: Restoring
learners’ interest in grammar. ReCALL, 29(3), 357–372.
Mok, C. H. (2012). Facebook and learning: Students’ perspectives on a course.
Journal of the NUS Teaching Academy, 2(3), 131–143.
Morrison, G. R., Ross, S. M. & Kemp, J. E. (2004). Designing effective instruc-
tion. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
References 225
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Morrow, K. (1981). Principles of communicative methodology. In K. Johnson &
K. Morrow (eds.), Communication in the classroom (pp. 59–66). Harlow, UK:
Longman.
Murphy, L. (2014). Autonomy, social interaction, and community: A distant
language learning perspective. In G. Murray (ed.), Social dimensions of auton-
omy in language learning (pp. 119–134). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Murray, G. (2014). Exploring the social dimensions of autonomy in language
learning. In G. Murray (ed.), Social dimensions of autonomy in language
learning (pp. 37–59). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Nah, K. C., White, P. & Sussex, R. (2008). The potential of using a mobile phone
to access the Internet for learning EFL listening skills within a Korean context.
ReCALL, 20(3), 331–347.
Nakata, T. (2017). Does repeated practice make perfect? The effects of within-
session repeated retrieval on second language vocabulary learning. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 39(4), 653–679.
Neuman, W. (2003). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative
approaches (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Neustaedter, C., Greenberg, S. & Boyle, M. (2006). Blur filtration fails to preserve
privacy for home-based video conferencing. ACM Transactions on Computer
Human Interaction, 13(1), 1–36.
Newell, L. A. (2017). Reclaiming attention in the digital generation Negotiator
(December 15, 2017). In C. Honeyman & A. K. Schneider (eds.), The negoti-
ator’s desk reference (pp. 201–214). Washington, DC: DRI Press. http://dx.doi
.org/10.2139/ssrn.2765470.
Ng, W. & Nicholas, H. (2013). A framework for sustainable mobile learning in
schools. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(5), 695–715.
Nguyen, V. & Pham, V. (2011). Learner open modeling in adaptive mobile
learning system for supporting student to learn English. International Journal
of Interactive Mobile Technologies, 5(4), 22–29.
Nisbett, R. & Wilson, T. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports
on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231–259.
Norman, D. (2013). The design of everyday things (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Basic Books.
Norris, J. & Ortega, L. (2005). Defining and measuring SLA. In C. J. Doughty &
M. H. Long (eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 717–761).
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
O’Bryan, A. (2008). Providing pedagogical learner training in CALL: Impact on
student use of language-learning strategies and glosses. CALICO Journal 26
(1), 142–159.
O’Callaghan, F. V., Neumann, D. L., Jones, L. & Creed, P. A. (2017). The use of
lecture recordings in higher education: A review of institutional, student, and
lecturer issues. Education & Information Technologies, 22(1), 399–415.
226 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
O’Flaherty, J. & Phillips, C. (2015). The use of flipped classrooms in higher
education: A scoping review. The Internet & Higher Education, 25, 85–95.
Ophir, E., Nass, C. & Wagner, A. D. (2009). Cognitive control in media multi-
taskers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37),
15583–15587.
Orlikowski, W. J. (2007). Sociomaterial practices: Exploring technology at work.
Organization Studies, 28(9), 1433–1448.
Osborne, M. (2013). An autoethnographic study of the use of mobile devices to
support foreign language vocabulary learning. Studies in Self-Access Learning
Journal, 4(4), 295–307.
Ozdamli, F. & Yildiz, E. P. (2017). Opinions and expectations of parents on
integrations of mobile technologies to education and school family cooper-
ation. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, 11(4),
136–148.
Pachler, N., Bachmair, B. & Cook, J. (2010). Mobile learning: Structures, agency,
practices. New York: Springer.
Palalas, A. & Hoven, D. (2013). Implications of using DBR to investigate the
iterative design of a mobile-enabled language learning system. In J. Rodrigues
& C. Pardo-Ballester (eds.), Design-based research in CALL. (pp. 41–66). San
Marcos, TX: CALICO.
Palardy, J. M. (1988). The effect of homework policies on student achievement.
NASSP Bulletin, 72(507), 14–17.
Palfreyman, D. (2003). Introduction: Culture and learner autonomy. In D.
Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures:
Language education perspectives (pp. 1–22). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Palomo-Duarte, M., Berns, A., Cejas, A., Dodero, J. M., Caballero, J. A. & Ruiz-
Rube, I. (2016). Assessing foreign language learning through mobile game-
based learning environments. International Journal of Human Capital and
Information Technology Professionals, 7(2), 53–67.
Paramskas, D. M. (1986). Artificial intelligence in computer-assisted language
instruction. Canadian Modern Language Review, 42(3), 619.
Pegrum, M. (2014). Mobile learning: Languages, literacies and cultures.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pegrum. (2016). Future directions in mobile learning. In D. Churchill, J. Lu,
T. K. F. Chu & B. Fox (eds.), Mobile learning design: Theories and application
(pp. 303–314). Singapore: Springer.
Pegrum, M. (2019). Mobile lenses on learning: Language and literacies on the
move. Singapore: Springer Nature.
Pegrum, M., Dudeney, G. & Hockly, N. (2018). Digital literacies revisited. The
European Journal of Applied Linguistics and TEFL, 7(2), 3–24.
Pelgrum, W. J. (2001). Obstacles to the integration of ICT in education: Results
from a worldwide educational assessment. Computers & Education, 37,
163–178.
Peppard, H. (1989). Language learning with the laser. Journal of Reading, 32(7),
628–633.
References 227
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Petersen, S. A., Divitini, M. & Chabert, G. (2008). Identity, sense of community
and connectedness in a community of mobile learners. ReCALL, 20(3),
361–379.
Peterson, M. (2012). EFL learner collaborative interaction in Second Life.
ReCALL, 24(1), 20–39.
Philp, J. & Duchesne, S. (2016). Exploring engagement in tasks in the language
classroom. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 36, 50–72.
Pica, T. (1991). Classroom interaction, participation, and comprehension:
Redefining relationships. System, 19, 437–452.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Pinkman, K. (2005). Using blogs in the foreign language classroom: Encouraging
learner independence. The JALT CALL Journal, 1(1), 12–24.
Polio, C. & Friedman, D. (2017). Understanding, evaluating, and conducting
second language writing research. New York: Routledge.
Porte, G. & McManus, K. (2019). Doing replication research in applied linguis-
tics. New York: Routledge.
Potter, J. (2012). Digital media and learner identity. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5),
1–6.
Price, P. C. (2012). Research methods in psychology: Core concepts and skills.
Boston: Flat World Knowledge, Inc.
Rampazzo, L. & Aranha, S. (2019). Telecollaboration and genres: A new perspec-
tive to understand language learning. Journal of Virtual Exchange, 2, 7–28.
Rao, S. K. & Prasad, R. (2018). Impact of 5G technologies on Industry 4.0.
Wireless Personal Communication, 100, 145–159.
Rashid, S., Cunningham, U., Watson, K. & Howard, J. (2018). Revisiting the
digital divide (s): Technology-enhanced English language practices at a univer-
sity in Pakistan. Australian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 64–87.
Rechtschaffen, D. (2014). The way of mindful education: Cultivating well-being
in teachers and students. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Reid, P. (2014). Categories for barriers to adoption of instructional technologies.
Education and Information Technologies, 19(2), 382–407.
Reinders, H. & Cho, M.-Y. (2010). Extensive listening practice and input
enhancement using mobile phones: Encouraging out-of-class learning with
mobile phones. TESL-EJ, 14(2). Retrieved from www.tesl-ej.org.
Reinders, H. & White, C. (2010). The theory and practice of technology in mater-
ials development and task design. In N. Harwood (ed.), Materials in ELT:
Theory and practice (pp. 58–80). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rezaee, A. A., Alavi, S. M. & Razzaghifard, P. (2019). The impact of mobile-
based dynamic assessment on improving EFL oral accuracy. Education and
Information Technologies, 24, 3091–3105.
Riazi, A. M. (2016). Innovative mixed-methods research: Moving beyond design
technicalities to epistemological and methodological realizations. Applied
Linguistics, 37(1), 33–49.
228 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Richards, J. C. & Rodgers, T. S. (2014). Approaches and methods in language
teaching (3rd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richardson, D. (2016). Exploring the potential of a location based augmented
reality game for language learning. International Journal of Game-Based
Learning, 16(3), 34–49.
Richey, R. C., Klein, J. D. & Tracey, M. W. (2011). The instructional design
knowledge base: Theory, research, and practice. New York: Routledge.
Richmond, S. (2012, August 12). Smartphones hardly used for calls. The
Telegraph. Retrieved from www.telegraph.co.uk.
Rivers, D. J. (2009). Utilizing the quick response (QR) code within a Japanese EFL
environment. The JALT CALL Journal, 5(2), 15–28.
Robb, T. (2006). Helping teachers to help themselves. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy
(eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 335–347). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Roberts, J. A., Yaya, L. H. P. & Manolis C. (2014). The invisible addiction: Cell-
phone activities and addiction among male and female college students.
Journal of Behavioral Addictions, 3(4), 254–265.
Robinson, P. (1995). Attention, memory, and the “noticing” hypothesis.
Language Learning, 45(2), 283–331.
Rodríguez, J. C. (2017). Design-based research. In C. A. Chapelle & S. Sauro
(eds.), The handbook of technology and second language teaching and learning
(pp. 364–377). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell.
Rogers-Estable, M. (2014). Web 2.0 use in higher education. European Journal of
Open, Distance and e-Learning, 17(2), 130–142.
Romeo, K. & Hubbard, P. (2010). Pervasive CALL learner training for improving
listening proficiency. In M. Levy, F. Blin, C. Siskin & O. Takeuchi (eds.),
WorldCALL: International perspectives on computer-assisted language learn-
ing (pp. 215–229). New York: Routledge.
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2007). Top of the pods: In search of a podcasting “podagogy”
for language learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(5),
471–492.
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2017). State of the app: A taxonomy and framework for
evaluating language learning mobile applications. CALICO Journal, 34(2),
243–258.
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2018). Autonomous language learning through a mobile appli-
cation: A user evaluation of the Busuu app. Computer Assisted Language
Learning, 31(8), 854–881.
Rosell-Aguilar, F. & Kan, Q. (2015). Design and user evaluation of a mobile
application to teach Chinese characters. The JALT CALL Journal, 11(1),
19–40.
Rosen, L. (2012). iDisorder: Understanding our obsession with technology and
overcoming its hold on us. New York: St Martin’s Griffin.
Ryan, S. & Mercer, S. (2012). Implicit theories: Language learning mindsets. In
S. Mercer, S. Ryan & M. Williams (eds.), Psychology for language learning:
Insights from research, theory and practice (pp. 74–89). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Mcmillan.
References 229
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Salomon, G. (1993). Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational con-
siderations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sandberg, J., Maris, M. & de Geus, K. (2011). Mobile English learning: An
evidence-based study with fifth graders. Computers & Education, 57(1),
1334–1347.
Santos, O. C., Saneiro, M., Boticario, J. G. & Rodriguez-Sanchez, M. C. (2016).
Toward interactive context-aware affective educational recommendations in
computer-assisted language learning. New Review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, 22(1–2), 27–57.
Savignon, S. J. (1983). Communicative competence: Theory and classroom prac-
tice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Sawyer, R. K. (2005). Social emergence: Societies as complex systems. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Sayes, E. (2014). Actor-Network Theory and methodology: Just what does it
mean to say that nonhumans have agency? Social Studies of Science, 44(1),
134–149.
Schieffelin, B. B. & Ochs, E. (eds.). (1986). Language socialization across cultures.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schlegel, M. J. (1995). A handbook of instructional and training program design.
Available from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED383281.
Schmidt, R. (1999). The role of consciousness in second language learning.
Applied Linguistics, 11, 129–158.
Schmidt, R. (2009). Attention. In P. Robinson (ed.), Cognition and second lan-
guage instruction (pp. 3–32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schuman, E., Cohen-Chen, S., Hirsch-Hoefler, S. & Halperin, E. (2016).
Explaining normative versus nonnormative action: The role of implicit theor-
ies. Political Psychology, 37(6), 835–852.
Schumann, J. H. (2015). Foreword. In Z. Dörnyei, P. MacIntyre & A. Henry
(eds.), Motivational dynamics in language learning (pp. xv–ixx). Bristol:
Multilingual Matters.
Schwienhorst, K. (2003). Neither here nor there? Learner autonomy and inter-
cultural factors in CALL environments. In D. Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (eds.),
Learner autonomy across cultures: Language education perspectives (pp.
164–182). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schwienhorst, K. (2008). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. New
York: Routledge.
Seker, S. (2020). Fuzzy quality function deployment method for smart phone product
design. In C. Kahraman & S. Cebi (eds)., Customer oriented product design:
Intelligent and fuzzy techniques (pp. 57–72). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Selwyn, N. (2014). Distrusting educational technology: Critical questions for
changing times. Abingdon: Routledge.
Sharples, M. (2013). Mobile learning: Research, practice and challenges. Distance
Education in China, 3(5), 5–11.
Sharples, M. (2014). Seamless learning despite context. In L.-H. Wong, M. Specht
& M. Milrad (eds.), Seamless learning in the age of mobile connectivity (pp.
41–55). Singapore: Springer.
230 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Sharples, M., Delgado Kloos, C., Dimitriadis, Y., Garlatti, S. & Specht, M.
(2015). Mobile and accessible learning for MOOCs. Journal of Interactive
Media in Education, 1(4), 1–8.
Sharples, M., Taylor, J. & Vavoula, G. (2007). A theory of learning for the
mobile age. In R. Andrews & C. Haythornthwaite (eds.), The Sage handbook
of e-learning research (pp. 221–247). London: Sage.
Shelly, G., Cashman, T. J., Gunter, G. A. & Gunter, R. E. (2006). Teachers
discovering computers: Integrating technology and digital media in the class-
room (4th ed.). Boston: Thomson Course Technology.
Sheppard, K. (1992). Two feedback types: Do they make a difference? RELC
Journal, 23, 103–110.
Simpson, J. (ed.). (2011). The Routledge handbook of applied linguistics. New
York: Routledge.
Sixsmith, C. & Simco, N. (1997). The role of formal and informal theory in the
training of student teachers. Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 5
(1), 4–13.
Slater, M. D. (2017). Crisis management by higher education leaders.
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Edgewood College, Madison, WI.
Smith, R. C. (2003). Pedagogy for autonomy as (becoming-)appropriate method-
ology. In D. Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (eds.). Learner autonomy across
cultures (pp. 129–146). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sockett, G. & Toffoli, D. (2012). Beyond learner autonomy: A dynamic systems
view of the informal learning of English in virtual online communities.
ReCALL, 24(2), 138–151.
Solak, E. & Cakır, R. (2015). Exploring the effect of materials designed with
augmented reality on language learners’ vocabulary learning. The Journal of
Educators Online, 13(2), 50–72.
Son, J.-B. (2018). Teacher development in technology-enhanced language teach-
ing. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Son, J.-B., Park, S. & Park, M. (2017). Digital literacy of language learners in two
different contexts. The JALT CALL Journal, 13(2), 77–96.
Son, J.-B. & Windeatt, S. (2017). Language teacher education and technology:
Approaches and practices. London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Sparrow, B., Liu, J. & Wegner, D. M. (2011). Google effects on memory: Cognitive
consequences of having information at our fingertips. Science, 333, 776–778.
Squire, K. (2009). Mobile media learning: Multiplicities of place. On the Horizon,
17(1), 70–80.
Statistica Research Department. (2018). Number of mobile phone users world-
wide from 2015–2020. Statistica. Retrieved from www.statista.com/statistics/
274774/forecast-of-mobile-phone-users-worldwide/.
Statistica Research Department. (2019). Share of individuals who accessed the
internet on a mobile phone in Great Britain from 2010 to 2019, by age.
Retrieved from www.statista.com/statistics/320974/internet-usage-on-mobile-
phones-gb-age/.
Statistica Research Department. (2020). Most popular social networks
worldwide as of January 2020, ranked by number of active users. Retrieved
References 231
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
from www.statista.com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-
number-of-users/.
Steel, C. (2012). Fitting learning into life: Language students’ perspectives on
benefits of using mobile apps. In M. Brown & T. Stewart (eds.), Future
challenges, sustainable futures (pp. 875–880). Wellington: ASCILITE.
Steel, C. & Levy, M. (2013). Language students and their technologies: Charting
the evolution 2006–2007. ReCALL, 25(3), 306–320.
Stickler, U. & Hampel, R. (2015). Transforming teaching: New skills for online
language learning spaces. In R. Hampel & U. Stickler (eds.), Developing online
language teaching: Research-based pedagogies and reflective practices (pp.
63–77). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stickler, U., Hampel, R. & Emke, M. (2020). A developmental framework for
online language teaching skills. Australian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 3(1),
133–151. https://doi.org/10.29140/ajal.v3n1.271.
Stockwell, G. (2007). A review of technology choice for language teaching skills
and areas in the CALL literature. ReCALL, 19(2), 105–120.
Stockwell, G. (2008). Investigating learner preparedness for and usage patterns of
mobile learning. ReCALL, 20(3), 253–270.
Stockwell, G. (2009). Teacher education in CALL: Teaching teachers to educate
themselves. International Journal of Innovation in Language Learning &
Teaching, 3(1), 99–112.
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining
the effect of the platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110.
Stockwell, G. (2012a). Diversity in research and practice. In G. Stockwell (ed.),
Computer assisted language learning: Diversity in research and practice (pp.
147–163). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stockwell, G. (2012b). Introduction. In G. Stockwell (ed.), Computer assisted
language learning: Diversity in research and practice (pp. 1–13). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Stockwell, G. (2013a). Technology and motivation in English language teaching
and learning. In E. Ushioda (ed.), International perspectives in motivation:
Language learning and professional challenges (pp. 156–175). Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Stockwell, G. (2013b). Tracking learner usage of mobile phones for language learn-
ing outside of the classroom. In P. Hubbard, M. Schultz & B. Smith (eds.),
Human-computer interaction in language learning: Studies in honor of Robert
Fischer. CALICO Monograph Series (pp. 118–136). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.
Stockwell, G. (2014). Exploring theory in computer-assisted language learning.
In X. Deng & R. Seow (eds.), Alternative pedagogies in the English language
& communication classroom: Selected papers from the Fourth CELC
Symposium for English Language Teachers (pp. 25–30). Singapore:
Centre for English Language Communication, National University of
Singapore.
Stockwell, G. (2016). Mobile language learning. In F. Farr & L. Murray (eds.),
Routledge handbook of technology in second language learning (pp. 296–307.
New York: Taylor & Francis.
232 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Stockwell, G. (2019). Insights from replication on the factors affecting task
engagement in mobile-based learning activities. Technology in Language
Teaching & Learning, 1(1), 33–51.
Stockwell, G. & Harrington, M. W. (2003). The incidental development of L2
proficiency in NS-NNS email interactions. CALICO Journal, 20(2), 337–359.
Stockwell, G. & Hubbard, P. (2013). Some emerging principles for mobile-
assisted language learning. TIRF Report, 2013, 1–14.
Stockwell, G. & Hubbard, P. (2014). Learner training in mobile language learn-
ing. In J. Colpaert, A. Aerts & M. Oberhofer (eds.), Proceedings of the
2014 CALL Research Conference (pp. 320–322). Antwerp: University of
Antwerp.
Stockwell, G. & Hubbard, P. (2018, August). Competition as an enhancement to
learner training in mobile language learning. Paper presented at the
EuroCALL 2018 Conference, August 22–25, 2018, University of Jyväskylä,
Finland.
Stockwell, G. & Liu, Y. C. (2015). Engaging in mobile phone-based activities for
learning vocabulary: An investigation in Japan and Taiwan. CALICO Journal,
32(2), 299–322.
Stockwell, G. & Reinders, H. (2019). Technology, motivation and autonomy,
and teacher psychology in language learning: Exploring the myths and possi-
bilities. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 29, 40–51.
Stockwell, G. & Tanaka-Ellis, N. (2012). Diversity in environments. In G.
Stockwell (ed.), Computer assisted language learning: Diversity in research
and practice (pp. 71–89). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stone, C. & Springer, M. (2019). Interactivity, connectedness and “teacher-pres-
ence”: Engaging and retaining students online. Australian Journal of Adult
Learning, 59(2), 146–169.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine
communication. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Suchman, L. (2007). Human-machine reconfigurations: Plans and situated
actions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sutton, J. (2008). Material agency, skills and history: Distributed cognition and
the archaeology of memory. In C. Knappett & L. Malafouris (eds.), Material
agency: Towards a non-anthropocentric approach (pp. 37–55). New York:
Springer.
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible
input and comprehensible output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden
(eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA:
Newbury House.
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G.
Cook & B. Seidlhofer (eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics
Studies in honour of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125–144). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G. & Paas, F. G. W. C. (1998). Cognitive
architecture and instructional design. Educational Psychology Review, 10,
251–296.
References 233
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Sykes, J. (2018). Digital games and language teaching and learning. Foreign
Language Annals, 51, 219–224.
Tabatabaei, O. & Goojani, A. (2012). The impact of text messaging on vocabu-
lary learning of Iranian EFL learners. Cross Cultural Communication, 8(2),
47–55.
Tai, Y. & Ting, Y.-L. (2011). Adoption of mobile technology for language
learning: Teacher attitudes and challenges. The JALT CALL Journal, 7(1),
3–18.
Tamez, R. (2016). Theoretical frameworks of performance-based models.
Performance Improvement, 55(6), 19–24.
Tassone, A., Liu, J. J. W., Reed, M. J. & Vickers, K. (2017). Multitasking in the
classroom: Testing an educational intervention as a method of reducing multi-
tasking. Active Learning in Higher Education. Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787417740772.
Tay, H.-Y. (2016). Longitudinal study on impact of iPad use on teaching and
learning. Cogent Learning, 3(1), 1–22.
Taylor, S. V. & Sobel, D. (2015). Using introspective methods. In J. D. Brown &
C. Coombe (eds.), The Cambridge guide to research in language teaching and
learning (pp. 231–237). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tchudi, S. (1988). Invisible thinking and the hypertext. The English Journal, 77
(1), 22–30.
Teske, K. (2017). Learning technology review: Duolingo. CALICO Journal, 34
(3), 393–401.
Thornton, P. & Houser, C. (2002). M-learning: Learning in transit. In P. Lewis
(ed.), The changing face of CALL: A Japanese perspective (pp. 229–243).
Lisse: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Thumlert, K., de Castell, S. & Jenson, J. (2015). Short cuts and extended tech-
niques: Rethinking relations between technology and educational theory.
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 47(8), 786–803.
Tidwell, J., Brewer, C. & Valencia, A. (2020). Designing interfaces: Patterns for
effective interaction design (3rd ed.). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Toland, S. H., Rivers, D. J. & Kohyama, M. (2016). Enhancing Japanese univer-
sity students’ English language presentation skills with mobile-video record-
ings. The JALT CALL Journal, 12(3), 179–201.
Tour, E. (2015). Digital mindsets: Teachers’ technology use in personal life and
teaching. Language, Learning & Technology, 19(3), 124–139.
Toyoda, E. & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication
between learners and native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 82–99.
Tran, P. (2016). Training learners to use Quizlet vocabulary activities on mobile
phones in Vietnam with Facebook. The JALT CALL Journal, 12(1), 43–56.
Tran, P. (2018). Enhancing online language learning task engagement through
social interaction. Australian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 88–101.
Tran, P. (2019). The role of teacher presence through online social interaction for
promoting task engagement outside of class. (Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion). Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
234 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Travers, C. J., Morisano, D. & Locke, E. A. (2015). Self-reflection, growth goals,
and academic outcomes. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 85(2),
224–241.
Traxler, J. (2007). Defining, discussing, and evaluating mobile learning: The
moving finger writes and having writ. . . International Review of Research in
Open and Distance Learning, 8(2), 1–12.
Traxler, J. (2011). The mobile and mobility: Information, organisations and
systems. In. J. Pokorny, V. Repa, K. Richta, W. Wojtkowski, H. Linger, C.
Barry & M. Lang (eds.), Information systems development: Modeling and
development (pp. 25–34). Heidelberg: Springer.
Traxler, J. & Vosloo, S. (2014). Introduction: The prospects for mobile learning.
Prospect, 44, 13–28.
Trinder, J. (2005). Mobile technologies and systems. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J.
Traxler (eds.), Mobile learning: A handbook for educators and trainers (pp.
7–24). Abingdon: Routledge.
Turner, M., Kitchenham, B., Brereton, P., Charters, S. & Budgen, D. (2010). Does
the technology acceptance model predict actual usage? A systematic literature
review. Information and Software Technology, 52(5), 463–479.
Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes.
Language Learning, 46, 327–369.
Tseng, W.-T. (2016). Measuring English vocabulary size via computerized adap-
tive testing. Computers & Education, 97, 69–85.
Udell, C. (2015). The importance of curation for successful mobile experiences. In
C. Udell & G. Woodill (eds.), Mastering mobile learning: Tips and techniques
for success (pp. 205–208). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Ushioda, E. (1998). Effective motivational thinking: A cognitive theoretical
approach to the study of language learning motivation. In E. Alcon & V.
Codina (eds.), Current issues in English language methodology (pp. 77–90).
Castelló de la Plana: Jaume I University Press.
Ushioda, E. (2011). Language learning motivation, self and identity: Current theoret-
ical perspectives. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(3), 199–210.
van der Leeuw, S. E. (2008). Agency, networks, past and future. In C. Knappett &
L. Malafouris (eds.), Material agency: Towards a non-anthropocentric
approach (pp. 217–247). New York: Springer.
van der Linden, E. (1993). Does feedback enhance computer-assisted language
learning? Computers & Education, 21(1–2), 61–65.
VanDerLinden, K. (2014). Blended learning as transformational institutional
learning. New Directions for Higher Education, 165, 75–85.
Vanijdee, A. (2003). Thai distance English learners and learner autonomy.
Open Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and e-Learning, 18(1), 75–84.
Van Lier, L. (2002). An ecological-semiotic perspective on language and linguis-
tics. In C. Kramsch (ed.), Language acquisition and language socialization:
Ecological perspectives (pp. 140–164). London: Continuum.
Van Osch, W. & Mendelson, O. (2011). A typology of affordances: Untangling
sociomaterial interactions through video analysis. CIS 2011 Proceedings.
Retrieved from https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2011/proceedings/visualmedia/1.
References 235
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Van Praag, B. & Sanchez, H. S. (2015). Mobile technology in second language
classrooms: Insights into its uses, pedagogical implications, and teacher beliefs.
ReCALL, 27(3), 288–303.
Van Ryn, M. & Heaney, C. A. (1992). What’s the use of theory? Health
Education Quarterly, 19(3), 315–330.
van’t Hoof, M. & Vahey, P. (2007). Introduction to special issue on highly
mobile computing. Educational Technology, 47(3), 3–5.
Ventakesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B. & Davis, F. D. (2003). User accept-
ance of information technology: Towards a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 27
(3), 425–478.
Verbeek, P.-P. (2013). Resistance is futile: Toward a non-modern democratization
of technology. Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology, 17(1), 72–92.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wacker, J. G. (1998). A definition of theory: Research guidelines for different
theory-building research methods in operations management. Journal of
Operations Management, 16(12), 361–385.
Wallinger, L. M. (2000). The role of homework in foreign language learning.
Foreign Language Annals, 33(5), 483–496.
Wang, A., Deutschmann, M. & Steinvall, A. (2013). Towards a model for mapping
participation: Exploring factors affecting participation in a telecollaborative learn-
ing scenario in Second Life. The JALT CALL Journal, 9(1), 3–22.
Wang, K. (2017). Status quo and prospective of WeChat in improving Chinese
English learners’ pronunciation. English Language Teaching, 10(4), 140–149.
Wang, S. & Smith, S. (2013). Reading and grammar learning through mobile
phones. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 117–134.
Wang, Yuping. (2004). Supporting synchronous distance language learning with
desktop videoconferencing. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 90–121.
Wang, Yijen. (2020). Engagement in PC-based, smartphone-based, and paper-based
materials: Learning vocabulary through Chinese Stories. Technology in Language
Teaching & Learning, 2(1), 3–21. https://doi.org/10.29140/tltl.v2n1.319.
Wang, Y.-H. (2016) Could a mobile-assisted learning system support flipped
classrooms for classical Chinese learning? Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, 32(5), 391–415.
Warschauer, M. (1996). Computer assisted language learning: An introduction. In
S. Fotos (ed.), Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3–20). Tokyo: Logos
International.
Warschauer, M. (1995). Motivational effects of using computers for writing and
communication. In M. Warschauer (ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language
learning: Proceedings of the Hawai’i Symposium (Technical Report #12) (pp.
29–46). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i, Second Language Teaching &
Curriculum Center.
Warschauer, M. & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An
overview. Language Teaching, 31, 57–71.
Wegmann, E., Stodt, B. & Brand, M. (2018). Cue-induced craving in Internet-
communication disorder using visual and auditory cues in a cue-reactivity
paradigm. Addiction Research & Theory, 26(4), 306–314.
236 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Weideman, A. (2017). Responsible design in applied linguistics: Theory and
practice. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Wenden, A. (2002). Learner development in language learning. Applied
Linguistics, 21(3), 32–55.
Weibe, G. & Kabata, K. (2010). Students’ and instructors’ attitudes toward the
use of CALL in foreign language teaching and learning. Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 23(3), 221–234.
Weibe, T. J. (2016). The information literacy imperative in higher education.
Liberal Education, 102 (1), 52–57. Retrieved from www.aacu.org/liberaledu
cation/2015-2016/fall-winter/wiebe.
Williams, M., Mercer, S. & Ryan, S. (2015). Exploring psychology in language
learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weiner, B. (2010). The development of an attribution-based theory of motivation:
A history of ideas. Educational Psychologist, 45(1), 28–36.
Werry, C. C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet Relay Chat.
In S. Herring (ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and
cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47–64). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wilensky, U. & Jacobson, M. J. (2014). Complex systems and the learning
sciences. In K. Sawyer (ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences
(2nd ed.) (pp. 319–338). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, M. & Burden, R. (1997). Psychology for language teachers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Winans, M. D. (2020). Busuu: A social network application to learn languages.
CALICO Journal, 37(1), 117–126.
Winke, P. & Goertler, S. (2008). Did we forget someone? Students’ computer
access and literacy for CALL. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 482–509.
Wong K., Wang F. L., Ng, K. K. & Kwan, R. (2015). Investigating Acceptance
towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students. In K. C. Li, T. L.
Wong, S. K. S. Cheung, J. Lam & K. K. Ng (eds.), Technology in education.
Transforming educational practices with technology. Communications in
Computer and Information Science, Volume 494 (pp. 9–19). Berlin: Springer.
Wong, L.-H., Chin, C.-K., Tan, C.-L. & Liu, M. (2010). Students’ personal and
social meaning making in a Chinese idiom mobile learning environment.
Educational Technology & Society, 13(4), 15–26.
Wong, L.-H., King, R. B., Chai, C. S. & Liu, M. (2016). Seamlessly learning
Chinese: Contextual meaning making and vocabulary growth in a seamless
Chinese as a second language learning environment. Instructional Science, 44,
399–422.
Woodill, G. (2015). Instructional design patterns for mobile learning. In C. Udell
& G. Woodill (eds.), Mastering mobile learning: Tips and techniques for
success (pp. 213–222). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Woolfolk, A. E., Winne, P. H. & Perry, N. E. (2000). Educational psychology
(Canadian ed.). Scarborough, ON: Allyn and Bacon Canada.
Wrigglesworth, J. & Harvor, F. (2018). Making their own landscape:
Smartphones and student designed language learning environments.
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(4), 437–458.
References 237
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Xie, W. (2019). An analysis of fragmented reading and its social impact on college
students in the era of new media. Journal of Contemporary Educational
Research, 3(3), 33–37.
Yamamoto, K. (2007). Banning laptops in the classroom: Is it worth the hassles?
Journal of Legal Education, 57(4), 1–44.
Yang, C. & Xie, Y. (2013). Learning Chinese idioms through iPads. Language
Learning & Technology, 17(2), 12–22.
Yang, S. & Mei, B. (2018). Understanding learners’ use of augmented reality in
language learning: Insights from a case study. Journal of Education for
Teaching, 44(4), 511–513.
Yang, S.-H. (2012). Exploring college students’ attitudes and self-efficacy of
mobile learning. exploring college students’ attitudes and self-efficacy of
mobile learning. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 11
(4), 148–154.
Yashima, T. (2014). Self-regulation and autonomous dependency amongst
Japanese learners of English. In G. Murray (ed.), Social dimensions of auton-
omy in language learning (pp. 60–80). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Young, R. (1988). Computer-assisted language learning conversations:
Negotiating an outcome. CALICO Journal, 5(3), 65–83.
Zainudden, Z. & Perera, C. J. (2019). Exploring students’ competence, autonomy
and relatedness in the flipped classroom pedagogical model. Journal of Further
& Higher Education, 41 (1), 115–126.
Zhang, H., Song, W. & Burston, J. (2011). Reexamining the effectiveness of
vocabulary learning via mobile phones. The Turkish Online Journal of
Educational Technology, 10(3), 203–221.
Zimmerman, J. (2020, March 20). The great online-learning experiment: Let’s use
the coronavirus crisis to determine the effectiveness of online learning. The
Chronicle of Higher Education, 66(25). Available from www.chronicle.com/
article/Coronavirusthe-Great/248216.
238 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Index
activity system of mobile learning, 157
actor-network theory, 180
ADDIE approach, 151–153, 157
affordances, 13, 27–28
designed, 27
emergent, 28
improvised, 27–28
technical, 28, 39, 43, 183
agency, 107, 133, 138, 144, 156, 173, 175,
180–183
collective, 132–133
direct personal, 131, 146
human, 131, 181
learner, 18, 106, 131, 133, 176, 184
non-human, 180
proxy, 131–132
ANT. See Actor–Network Theory
apps, 11, 22, 29, 31, 43, 57–59, 67, 71, 76,
79, 97, 111, 117–118, 132, 142, 160,
166–167, 170, 175, 177–178, 182–183
native, 118
types of, 161
web, 118
artefacts, 18, 27–28, 98, 149, 152, 156,
180, 182, 190
design of, 98, 100, 148, 154, 158–161,
168
assessment, 13, 46, 90, 136, 148, 155, 167,
173
design of, 165
open-book-open-web, 165
peer, 62
atomised learning, 167
attribution theory, 108
augmented reality, 29, 64, 76
autonomy, 35, 59, 62, 67, 100, 106, 109,
125, 131, 133, 135–141, 144, 147,
156, 182, 184
autonomy, 35
blended learning, 150
bring your own device, 30
BYOD. See Bring Your Own Device
CMC. See computer-mediated
communication
cognitive load theory, 99
collaboration, 47, 82, 110, 137, 150, 156,
171
community, 28, 62, 137
complex systems theory, 94, 96, 105–106
comprehensible input theory, 96
comprehensible output theory, 96
computer-mediated communication, 83,
110, 164
computers, 5, 10, 13, 24, 26–27, 35, 69,
72–74, 85, 126, 166–167, 189
desktop, 6, 9, 30, 41, 61, 70, 99
laptop, 8–9, 21, 24–25, 30, 61, 99
mainframe, 24
microcomputers, 31
netbook, 21
personal, 24, 67
constructivism, 96
context awareness, 192
Conversational Framework, 155–157
courseware, 23, 152
craving, 123
crisis management, 185
cue reactivity, 123
cyberslacking, 122
digital divide, 2, 6, 19, 30, 124
digital literacy, 16, 100
directed motivational currents, 109
distractions, 18, 55, 74, 85, 105, 112, 119,
121, 128, 170, 179
distributed cognition, 103
dual systems theory, 103–105
dynamic systems theory. See complex
systems theory
Ecology of Resources Model, 153–155
electronic dictionaries, 22, 24
emergency remote teaching, 186
engagement, 61, 71, 180
limited, 35, 71, 120
239
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
engagement (cont.)
sustaining, 18, 32, 35, 58, 74, 105, 114,
133, 143, 146, 169–170
task. See task engagement
expectancy-value theory, 107–108
Facebook, 48, 120, 123, 144, 161, 164, 170
flipped classrooms, 62–63
formal learning, 57, 60
Global Positioning Service, 10, 28–30, 37,
118, 133, 159, 168
GPS. See Global Positioning Service
GSM phones, 6, 22, 116–117
HCI. See human–computer interaction
human–computer interaction, 149
hype cycles, 38–39
ICT. See information and communications
technologies
informal learning, 57
information and communications
technologies, 2, 190
Instagram, 48
interaction hypothesis, 96
interactivity, 178–180
intercultural understanding, 34
internet, 2, 6, 9, 22, 25, 28–29, 34, 56, 124,
183
addiction, 123
iPAC framework, 156
language socialisation, 110–111
learner
motivation. See motivation
learner autonomy. See autonomy
learner beliefs, 133
learner motivation. See motivation
learner training, 18, 35, 48, 58–59, 61, 71,
119, 130, 132, 135–140, 144, 152,
169, 185, 189–190
pedagogical, 141, 143–144
rationale for, 134–135
strategic, 141–143
technical, 141–142
learners
shifting roles of, 46–48
learning goals, 18, 23, 51, 58, 60, 64, 114,
132, 139, 151, 153, 155, 158, 168, 190
learning management systems, 34, 38, 40,
127
Line, 164
LMS. See learning management systems
lurkers, 170
M-COPE framework, 157
Messenger, 120
mobile phones, 2, 5–6, 8, 11, 21, 24, 29–30,
36, 41, 54, 63, 70, 72–73, 75, 79, 83,
85, 99, 115, 117–118, 132, 134, 159,
161, 163, 167, 176, 183
mobility, 99, 125–126, 157, 159, 168,
173
3 Mobilities Framework, 174
defining, 8
learning and, 68
lifelong, 174–178
portability and, 9
MOOCs, 34, 38, 47, 61
motivation
autonomy and, 140
for research, 71
intrinsic, 120
learner, 3, 34, 58–59, 62–63, 67, 96, 106,
121, 132–133, 135, 138–140, 155,
159, 168, 181, 185
teacher, 49
technology and, 32, 139, See
technology
theories of, 91, See theory
to use technology, 49, 99, 127
multimedia, 10, 31, 34, 43, 99
multimodal literacies, 102–103
multitasking, 121–124
near-field communication, 24, 37
networking, 16, 19, 47
NFC, See near-field communication
normalisation, 135
noticing hypothesis, 96
novelty effect, 33, 36, 139
pandemic pedagogy, 186
PDAs. See personal digital assistants
pedagogy, 1–2, 5, 16–17, 32, 35, 37–40, 45,
70, 75, 83, 112, 125–128, 147, 149,
157, 184, 189, 192
personal digital assistants, 8, 17, 21, 24, 29,
35, 68, 70, 118, 160
240 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
physical mobile interaction, 30
PMI. See physical mobile interaction
portability, 7, 17, 25–26, 71, 115, 167
RASE learning design framework, 157
research
affordances and, 28
elicitation techniques, 83–86
ethnographic methods, 82–83
experimental methods, 86–88
in CALL, 31–36
in MALL, 36–37, 69–76
introspection methods, 80–81
observation, 78–79
practice and, 40–43
teaching and, 13
theory and, 40–43
second-language acquisition, 3, 17, 66–67,
81, 97
selective attention shifting, 122
self-determination theory, 96, 108–109
situated learning, 99, 126, 156, 158–159,
192
Skype, 161
SLA. See second-language acquisition
smartphones, 5–6, 9, 11, 22, 25, 36–37, 75,
116–118, 177
SNS. See social networking
social networking, 26, 43, 47, 55, 110, 120,
123, 125, 133, 142, 164
sociocultural theory, 96, 110
sociomateriality, 28, 180–183
sustainability of engagement. See
engagement
tablets, 6, 8, 22, 24, 30, 70, 81, 99, 118,
177
tasks, 7–8, 12, 14, 29, 36, 41, 49, 63, 83,
105, 107, 110, 115, 117, 121, 123,
128, 148
applying, 185
defining, 149
design of, 51, 99–100, 126, 134, 154,
161–164, 168
engagement in, 10, 13, 61, 63, 72–73,
108, 112, 115, 121, 127, 133,
135–140, 168, 175, 183
production, 83
selection of, 150, 152, 166–167, 169
teacher motivation. See motivation
teacher training, 50–52, 74, 84, 90, 152,
189–190
teachers
early in-service, 51
experienced in-service, 51
pre-service, 51
resistance to technology, 54–57
shifting roles of, 48–53
teaching goals, 51
technology
addiction, 124
affordances. See affordances
attitudes towards, 74
controversy, 1
defining, 23
developments in, 26
evolving, 191
impact of, 11
integration of, 84
language learning and, 110
motivation and, 107
practice and, 41
research and, 41
support for, 168
theories of, 100–105
theory and, 42
training. See training
technology acceptance model, 99
theoretical pluralism, 98
theories
formal, 91–92
fundamentals of, 93–94
in CALL, 95–99
informal, 91
of complexity, 105–106
of motivation, 106–109
of technology, 100–105
social models of language learning,
109–111
touchscreen, 9, 35, 37
TPACK, 189
tracking, 13, 69, 77, 82
learner behaviour, 80, 127
software, 17, 77, 127
training
learner. See learner training
teacher. See teacher training
translanguaging, 47
Twitter, 47, 120, 161, 164
Index 241
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
ubiquitous learning, 14, 99
ubiquity, 125–126
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of
Technology, 102
UTAUT. See Unified Theory of Acceptance
and Use of Technology
wearable technologies, 5–6, 9, 64
WhatsApp, 120, 164
YouTube, 161, 191
ZAA. See Zone of Available Assistance
Zone of Available Assistance, 153
Zone of Proximal Adjustment, 153
Zone of Proximal Development,
153
ZPA. See Zone of Proximal Adjustment
ZPD. See Zone of Proximal Development
242 Index
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108652087.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
