PragmaticBookshelf

simplicity
sustainable, humane, and
effective software development
dave thomas

edited by

Susannah Davidson

simplicity
sustainable,
humane,
and effective
software development
by dave thomas
Version: P1.0 (June 2025)
Copyright © 2025 David Thomas. This book is licensed to the individual who purchased it. We don't
copy-protect it because that would limit your ability to use it for your own purposes. Please don't break
this trust—you can use this across all of your devices but please do not share this copy with other
members of your team, with friends, or via file sharing services. Thanks.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and The Pragmatic Programmers, LLC was
aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The Pragmatic Starter Kit, The Pragmatic Programmer, Pragmatic Programming, Pragmatic Bookshelf
and the linking g device are trademarks of The Pragmatic Programmers, LLC.
Every precaution was taken in the preparation of this book. However, the publisher assumes no
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages that may result from the use of information
(including program listings) contained herein.
The team that produced this book includes: Dave Thomas (Publisher), Susannah Davidson (Development Editor), L. Sakhi MacMillan (Copy Editor),
Potomac Indexing, LLC (Indexing)
Janet Furlow (COO),
For customer support, please contact support@pragprog.com.
For international rights, please contact rights@pragprog.com.
You must either make a tool of the creature, or a man of him.
You cannot make both. Men were not intended to work with
the accuracy of tools, to be precise and perfect in all their
actions. If you will have that precision out of them, and make
their fingers measure degrees like cog-wheels, and their arms
strike curves like compasses, you must unhumanize them. All
the energy of their spirits must be given to make cogs and
compasses of themselves….
On the other hand, if you will make a man of the working
creature, you cannot make him a tool. Let him but begin to
imagine, to think, to try to do anything worth doing; and the
engine-turned precision is lost at once. Out come all his
roughness, all his dullness, all his incapability; shame upon
shame, failure upon failure, pause after pause: but out comes
the whole majesty of him also; and we know the height of it
only when we see the clouds settling upon him.
- John Ruskin, The Stones of Venice
Table of Contents
Let’s Change Our World—Again
Don’t Do What I Do
See You Online
My Thanks
1. An Approach to Simplicity
Part I. Simplify What You Do
Simplify How You Do It
2. Lose Weight Now…
Practice 1. Cut Back on Unhealthy Dependencies
Practice 2. Frameworks: Read the Ingredients
Practice 3. The Best Features Are the Ones You Don’t Ship
3. Simplify Your Projects
Practice 4. Decouple Your Teams
Practice 5. Meetings, Bloody Meetings
Practice 6. Decorum: If You Have to Have a Meeting
Practice 7. Spread Your Skills
Practice 8. Let the Information Go Free
Part II. Simplify Your Environment
4. Automate All the Things
Practice 9. Make Your Desktop Work for You
Practice 10. Make Your Terminal Work for You
Practice 11. Automate Everything Else
Practice 12. Own Your Editor
Practice 13. Automate Setting Up Your Development Machine
5. “Embrace Change”
Practice 14. Mix the Practical and the Fanciful
Practice 15. Play in the Future, Work in the Past
Part III. Simplify Your Interactions
6. Soft Skills
Practice 16. Disagreements Are Not Zero-Sum Games
Practice 17. Work On Your Empathy
Practice 18. Have Empathy for Things
Practice 19. Spin a Story
Part IV . Simplify Your Code
7. Data Driven
Practice 20. Let the Data Do the Driving
Practice 21. Simplify Your Tests Using Tables
Practice 22. Simplify Logic with State Machines
8. Down at the Codeface
Practice 23. No Comment
Practice 24. TODO or Not TODO
Practice 25. Line ’em Up
Practice 26. Dangle That Comma
Practice 27. Sort ’em Out
Practice 28. Tall Beats Wide
Practice 29. Keep It Local
9. Outroduction
A1. Bibliography
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Let’s Change Our World—Again
Software development is inherently complex.
Unfortunately, we seem to delight in making it not just complex but
complicated too.
What’s the difference? A snowflake is complex; the weather system that
produced it is complicated. Both have many parts, but with the snowflake
you can see how they interact—you’ll find a pattern, and some rules.
With software, complexity is difficult, but it has rules. Complications arise
when we don’t follow them. And these complications turn our projects into
hard-to-understand, hard-to-predict, tangled balls of logic. They interfere
with the way we run our projects, and the way we deal with people.
Working with complications is like playing a game where not only do you
not know the rules but you can’t know the rules.
The sad thing? Most of the complications in our projects are self-induced.
We add them when we don’t stop to think, when we don’t take the time to
listen to that small inner voice saying “really?”
We don’t invest the time to make things simple, because we have no time.
We have no time because things are complicated.
We have to make the time; if we don’t, we won’t learn and improve. We
have to discover how to embrace simplicity and create simple things,
otherwise we’ll spend our time like the plate juggler, running between the
poles to stop things from crashing down.
Ward Cunningham coined the phrase, “Do the simplest thing that could
possibly work.” That’s not just a way of writing code; it applies to
everything we do.
Simplicity doesn’t mean simplistic. It doesn’t mean naïve. It means
producing things that are easy to understand and change, and that have that
vague quality of “feeling right.” Christopher Alexander, the architect who
wrote the original A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings,
Construction [AIS77], called this the quality without a name. Achieving
simplicity rewards you with this feeling.
Don’t Do What I Do
A problem writing about simplicity is that no rules or procedures exist that
make things simple, no coding standards or design methodologies that
guarantee the things you produce will not end up complicated. Simplicity
isn’t the way you do things; it’s the spirit with which you do them.
Why? Because what’s simple to me might not seem so to you, and
something you find simple might go over my head.
I cannot tell you what to do, because I don’t know. I can’t give you a
structured set of rules to follow, because there aren’t any. Instead, I decided
to teach by example. I divided the book into a set of practices. Each is
motivated by a situation that I’ve been in that felt more complex than it
should. For each, I outline the steps I took to simplify things.
What I did is not any kind of general-purpose solution to the problem; I
don’t want you to copy my steps unthinkingly. Instead, I hope that you’ll
read each practice as a kind of story—the path I took to make something
simpler. Treat this as an example as you find your own path.
Courage
Kent Beck kicked off modern software development with Extreme
Programming Explained: Embrace Change [Bec00]. He lists the five values
of XP as Communication, Feedback, Respect, Simplicity, and Courage. I
believe these are core values not just for Extreme Programming, not just for
programming in general, but for life.
Ultimately the ideas in this book all make great demands on you as a
person. They ask you to create and follow a set of values, often in the face
of peer pressure. They ask you to think about what you’re doing rather than
going with the flow, and they inform you when you have to make a stand.
And they ask you to fight against all the factors that make things complex
as you try to bring simplicity into your life.
All this takes courage. All great changes do.
Enjoy the process.
See You Online
https://pragprog.com/titles/dtcode
The book’s home page, with links to its discussion forum and the
errata list.
https://articles.pragdave.me
Where I write articles and notes about simplicity and whatever else
catches my fancy.
https://pragdave.me
My personal home page.
https://pragprog.com
My business and the last 20 years of my life.
My Thanks
To my reviewers: Aino Corry, Bruce Eckel, Derek Sivers, Kim Shrier, Neal
Ford, Noel Rappin, Saron Yitbarek, and Zachary McKenna. True friends are
the people who tell you you’re wrong without making you feel like a
complete fool.
To my editor: this is the first time in 25 years of writing books that I’ve had
an editor, and I’m never going back. Susannah Davidson is incredibly
skilled at seeing the big picture and the small details, all at the same time,
and finding ways to make them coherent. Another friend.
To my wife: for being my wife and my friend.
And, finally, to all of you, for listening.
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Chapter 1
An Approach to Simplicity
I can’t tell you how to do things with simplicity; everyone’s context is
different.
Instead, I’m going to describe a bunch of situations which are crying out to
be simplified, and then we’re going to look at what I did to simplify them.
I’m not doing this to show off, or so that you can copy me. My goal here is
to show you an approach you can use to recognize and cut away
complexity. I call it Orient, Step, Learn.
Orient, Step, Learn
Scientists and engineers spend their lives exploring unknowns. For at least
400 years, the approach they’ve chosen has been largely unchanged:
Come up with a hypothesis.
Design an experiment to try to disprove it.
Analyze the results and repeat.
This is the essence of the scientific method.
We can follow the same approach when we approach complexity.
Orient
We need to discover something we feel is too complex. This process
can be obvious: no one knows how this code works. It can be subtle:
that nagging intuition that gives you pause.
When this happens, we stop and think. What are the approaches we
could take to make things simpler. And, most importantly, how will we
know whether the result actually is simpler?
Do this over time, and you’ll develop a spidey-sense, that indefinable
feeling that warns you that something isn’t how it should be.
Take a Step
The key concept here is the word “step.” We don’t plan a journey; we
don’t write a set of procedures; we don’t abandon what we were doing.
Instead we find the simplest thing we could do that tests out our idea.
The less time and effort it takes, the faster we can decide whether to
pursue it or drop it. If we were wrong, it hasn’t cost us a lot.
Learn
The step is complete; the experiment is over. Now’s the time to reflect.
One step is rarely enough, so it’s vital to use the information you learn
from prior steps to inform each subsequent one.
All the sections in the rest of the book are called practices, because they
represent things you have to practice if they are to become second nature.
The more you make yourself orient (recognize complexity), step (try an
experiment), and learn (adjust what you do), the less you’ll have to
remember to do it going forward. It’ll be just like driving: something you
do without having to think which pedal does what.
Maybe write “Orient, Step, Learn” on an index card and tape it where you
can see it while you work. If you work alone (or with understanding
people), it actually helps to say each step out loud as you do it. The more
stimuli you give your brain, the quicker it becomes an innate pattern.
Anyway, onward!
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Part 1
Simplify What You Do
Simplify How You Do It
Chapter 2
Lose Weight Now…
Studies going back almost 100 years show that when you expand a road
network by x%, traffic inevitably grows by at least x%. Economists call this
induced demand: when there’s more of something, people will use it.
At college, my department ran an IBM/370-135. It supported 20
simultaneous online users, most doing development work. It had a total of
384 kB of memory. Nowadays, you’d be lucky to fit a single web app into
1,000 times that space.
We can boast that the phone in our pocket has more GFlops than the entire
world’s hardware in 1970, but we forget that they put people on the moon
using a flight guidance computer with 4 kB of RAM and less than 40 kB of
storage, all clocked at a whopping 2 MHz.
Thanks to Moore’s Law, we don’t particularly care; we have our own kind
of induced demand. It’s an unwritten rule of development: there are always
more gigahertz and gigabytes—have fun.
But this expansion comes with a number of costs. Let’s ignore the
environmental and resource-depletion issues and selfishly look at our
parochial world of writing software.
Our code is becoming more and more bloated. That makes it harder to
understand, harder to maintain, and (as we’ll see) harder to deploy in the
future.
It’s time to make our code healthier—it’s time to put it on a diet.
Practice 1 Cut Back on Unhealthy Dependencies
It’s late 2024. I just created a new Phoenix project using mix phx.new
my_project. It had 43 dependencies, which came in at 15 MB.
A new Rails project installs 83 gems, and these in turn load hundreds more.
Here’s a dependency graph of a basic Rails app.
npx create-react-app my-app downloaded 874 modules (about 350 MB of code)
for a basic React app. I had time to make a cup of tea.
I’m not claiming that React is bloated compared to the others. I’m saying
that they all are carrying around a lot of baggage. And these are the
numbers for baseline, empty projects. As you start adding code, you’ll be
adding dependencies of your own (and those dependencies will have their
own dependencies, and so on).
I hate dependencies—every last one of them.
Every dependency I use gives control of a part of my future to a tree of
third parties, people I probably don’t know, can’t control, and in reality
can’t even trust. Probably tens of thousands of people have contributed to
the 874 modules that React uses out of the box. It only takes one of them to
break my app.
Idea 1 Every dependency gives away control of part of
your app
In March 2016, a prolific developer of JavaScript libraries suddenly
removed all of them from the NPM repository. Among these modules was
one named left-pad which, not surprisingly, added padding characters to the
start of a string until it reached a given length.
The left-pad library was used by many thousands of other libraries, and
these in turn by even more libraries. These second-order libraries included
mainstays of the JavaScript world, such as Babel and React.
One developer’s decision rendered a significant proportion of JavaScript
apps unbuildable.
In March 2024, a global warning (CVE-2024-3094) was issued after
malicious code was found embedded in the XZ compression library. This
was particularly concerning because the library was used by the OpenSSH
daemon code, potentially compromising what was assumed to be a secure
data transport.
When you add a dependency to your code, you’re inviting a bunch of
developers into your project, giving them access to your runtime. And these
developers don’t have to be malicious to cause problems: they can change
APIs, deprecate features, or accidentally add security vulnerabilities.
My Personal Dependency Hell
In 2023 I came back to the Pragmatic Bookshelf after a seven-year break
only to discover that the software that was the backbone of our business had
effectively been unmaintained. It was still running Rails 3 (Rails is
currently at version 8).
No problem, I thought, I’ll migrate it up to the latest Rails, one release at a
time.
Except Rails 3 uses a library that used a library that…was totally different
on modern machines. I couldn’t even build the Rails 3 gems. I tried just
updating blindly, only to discover that Rails had so many breaking changes
between all these releases that I couldn’t even get the app to start.
In the end, the only thing I could do was create a Docker container running
an eight-year-old version of Linux that still had the old libraries. After a
frustrating week, I finally had the most complex (and fragile) development
environment I’ve ever used. I’m still managing the fallout as we migrate
away.
Simplifying Dependencies
Remember the left-pad fiasco? Here’s the entire code from the library:
module.exports = leftpad;
function leftpad (str, len, ch) {
str = String(str);
var i = -1;
if (!ch && ch !== 0) ch =
len = len - str.length;
while (++i < len) {
str = ch + str;
}
return str;
' '
;
}
It’s 11 lines of fairly ugly code; the line str = ch + str gives me garbage-
collection nightmares.
Somewhere out there are developers who thought, “I need to left-pad this
string” and who then took the time to search for a library, add it to their
build, and work out how to import and use it. It probably took them three
times as long as it would have done to write it themselves.
Today, padstart is built into JavaScript. Even if it weren’t, a decent
implementation could be just three lines of code:
function leftpad (str, len, ch=
" "
) {
str = String(str);
len = len - str.length;
return (len > 0) ? ch.repeat(len) + str : str;
}
Idea 2 Eleven lines of code should not be a
dependency
I know—this is an extreme case. But it’s still useful to think about why
folks chose to find a library for something so trivial. They probably were
under time constraints, although in this case finding the library probably
took longer than writing the code.
They may also have fallen into the someone-else’ s-problem trap. Delegating
code to the author of a library means that they’re not responsible for any
problems.
Obviously I need to add dependencies to my project; I’m not going to write
an SSH library from scratch—that would be ridiculous. But there’s a trade-
off to be made: adding a dependency today may solve a problem today. At
the same time, it adds complexity for future-me in terms of risk and
maintenance.
Isolating Dependencies
In the past, I’ve been bitten when a dependency that I’ve used extensively
in an app suddenly changed an API; I’d have to update code across multiple
source files to adapt to that change.
Now, if possible, whenever I use a dependency widely in an app, I wrap it
in a simple function and use that function in the rest of the code. That way,
if the API changes, I might be able to get away with updating just the
wrapper function.
The Dependency Decision Chain
Before adding a dependency to a project, I consider:
Do I need the functionality?
Younger Dave often added a new dependency after I read about some cool
new feature online. I did it because it looked interesting, not because my
project absolutely needed it.
Now I try to have the discipline not to experiment like that; if my project
will work without it, I won’t add it. Remember that “less is more.” (Of
course, nothing stops me from playing around with it in my spare time…)
Is it easier just to code it?
Increasingly, I find myself not using dependencies if all I need from them is
a single function. If I can write it myself, I do. If the library is open source
and the license permits, I might copy the function (with attribution) into my
own code, where I can examine it and possibly update it to fit the project’s
needs better.
Am I buying a jungle?
Joe Armstrong said about dependencies, “You wanted a banana but what
you got was a gorilla holding the banana and the entire jungle.” Sometimes
the functionality I want comes with a lot of baggage. Maybe I just need to
escape HTML strings, but the library I found contains an entire HTML
parsing and creation system along with a dozen external dependencies for
things like lexing, indentation, and so on.
All that extra cruft is a liability. I may not be using it, but it still contributes
to the code that I might be fighting with in the future.
Is this vital to my project?
If so, I’d better make sure I have a local copy. Nothing’s quite like the
sinking feeling of getting a 404 when you try to fetch something your
project needs.
Am I locked to a particular version?
I always use a dependency manager for the libraries I use. I also use one
(currently asdf) for the tools. These allow me to specify the versions of
everything I use when creating a project.
That’s fine for a while, but eventually there’ll come a day when I try to add
one more dependency, and it relies on a newer version of some dependency
I already have. I update that dependency but then break the dependency
requirements for five more libraries. Sometimes the most innocuous
addition can end up causing an update that ripples through half my
dependencies. And when I make those updates, I’m hoping that my tests
will cover the obscure corner cases that might break.
During development, I got into the habit of updating my dependencies daily
or weekly, banking on the idea that smaller steps will be easier to handle.
But this doesn’t help down the road, after I’ve moved on. When I come
back to a project after only a year or so, I assume I’m going to be battling
with dependencies for a while before I can start being productive.
And because dependencies depend on each other, too, each additional
dependency will cost you more than a linear amount of time down the road.
Am I secure?
Many library repositories monitor for reported security vulnerabilities in the
libraries they host. When you install a JavaScript library using NPM, for
example, it will perform a quick audit of all your packages, and not just the
ones you’re installing:
$ npm add jest
npm warn deprecated glob@7.2.3: Glob versions prior to v9 are no longer
supported
added 275 packages, and audited 310 packages in 13s
33 vulnerabilities (6 moderate, 19 high, 8 critical)
Run
`
npm audit` for details.
In this example, the deprecation warning is caused by adding Jest, but the
33 vulnerabilities were all in existing packages.
During development, I see these reports whenever I refresh my
dependencies. After that time, I get warnings from GitHub if it notices a
security issue in my codebase.
Idea 3 Make each dependency a deliberate choice
Here’s what I currently do:
I don’t use a whole dependency for just a single function.
I don’t use a dependency for something I could simply write.
I try to keep dependencies updated during development.
I spend a little time checking the provenance of dependencies before
adding them.
Here’s what I should get better at doing:
Investigate services which monitor the security status of dependencies.
Get more consistent about wrapping dependencies to isolate them from
the rest of my code.
Set aside a day a quarter to fetch and build old projects, updating their
dependencies if possible.
Your checklists will be different. But having your own deliberate decision-
making process will help you to weight the benefits of each dependency
you add.
Investigate
Open up your current project and have a look at all the top-level dependencies (the ones you and
your team have declared).
Do you know what each does?
Do you know how your code is using each? Is that use trivial? Can you remove the
dependency and simply implement the functionality you were using?
Now look at the list of all the dependencies (not just the ones you explicitly included). These will
typically be in something like a .lock file.
How many are there?
Does that number scare you?
Are you going to do something about it?
Practice 2 Frameworks: Read the Ingredients
These days, I’d guess a majority of projects run inside some kind of
framework. That’s good: frameworks handle the low-level details and let
you get on with writing application-level code. Frameworks should make
your code simpler. Sometimes, they do.
But other times, tying your codebase to a framework is like jumping on a
runaway train—you move fast, but it’s scary and there’s likely to be a crash
at some point.
Why am I so cynical?
Come Into My Parlor
A framework envelops your application code; it’s in charge, and your code
provides callbacks and hooks for it to call. When you need to get something
done, you call out to the framework.
Once you’ve committed to a framework, you’re not going to be able to
extract your code without a whole lot of hassle. Not only does the
framework control your APIs, it also defines how you architect your
application.
This might be acceptable if the team in charge of the framework guarantees
long-term stability. Most don’t.
Inflation Spirals
Creating a new framework is a lot of work. Introducing it to the public, and
handling all their questions, suggestions, and flames, is even more work.
Learning to manage your contributors is taxing. And there’s the day job,
too.
So the people who succeed creating frameworks have to be passionate and
driven.
Sometimes a framework will be the first in its field. If it’s popular,
competitors will appear, each claiming to do something better. The first
framework responds, adding some of these new features, claiming to do
them better still. Other frameworks then release their own new features.
Other times, the custodian of a framework realizes there’s a better way to
do something (or even just a sexy new way). If you’re lucky, they’ll
deprecate the old way for a while before turning it off in favor of the new
way.
And so we see frameworks constantly evolving, adding new features, and
discarding older features that are no longer cool. (“You were using that?
Well, you’ll need to rewrite your code if you want to stay on the train.”)
It’s a very rare framework that doesn’t get larger and more complex over
time. The bigger the framework, the bigger (and more complex) your app,
and the larger the number of dependencies you’re carrying.
Idea 4 Frameworks accrete functionality
In fact, the dangers of complex frameworks can come at you in two ways.
Green Field Projects
Back when I was playing with full-stack JavaScript apps, I was constantly
researching what was new and hot, looking for those groovy new features
that would make me a cool kid. I reasoned that something new and popular
must be better than the three-month-old framework I had been using.
I’d watch a couple of videos with surprisingly conflicting installation
instructions, so I kind of went with both. It took three or four tries, but
eventually the “Hello, World!” app starts up. From here on in, it’s just a
simple matter of implementation….
First up: handle an incoming request. But how? The framework has sync
and async options. The async side can use callbacks or events, and you can
add your own state machine for finer control. And there’s the choice of
messaging infrastructure; I could install any one of four options. Before
doing any of this, I need to generate an SSL certificate, and the framework’s
brand-new security release insists on you giving it a valid Root certificate.
Idea 5 If a framework gives you options,
it contains things you don’t need
All these options and features come with a price—they add complexity,
dependencies, and bloat. And unused functionality that’s just sitting there
could well be tomorrow’s security hole.
Brown Field Projects
Maybe you’ve been using a framework since V0.8. You’ve grown up with
it, and your team knows it well. Increasingly, though, the rate of change and
deprecations has been bogging you down. You absolutely have to integrate
new framework releases to get the security updates, but each release brings
incompatibilities, which means you’re spending your time updating existing
code and not writing new code. Even worse, your team enjoys exploring
new facets of the framework and are constantly changing code to use them,
even when there’s no apparent difference from the end-user’s perspective.
Idea 6
If you spend more time maintaining your
framework than your code, maybe the
framework’s not helping
When it was new and lean, that framework helped you deploy your new app
in record time. But now that you depend on it, it seems to be slowing you
down.
So, No Frameworks?
Of course, you should use frameworks. But here’s my strong advice. Don’t
choose the framework with the most features and the newest technologies.
It might be fun initially, but you may well regret it a year from now.
Instead, choose a framework that’s been around—and stable—for a while.
Choose a framework that has the fewest features that still does what you
need it to do.
For example, if you’re creating a server-side API in Ruby, look into
something minimal, such as Sinatra, before you reach for Rails. In
JavaScript, consider Express as well as Nest or Adonis.
The guiding principle here is that the better you understand your
environment, the simpler it is to use. The smaller your environment, the
easier it is to understand and maintain. It’s also easier to bring new
developers up to speed.
Remember, less is more when it comes to frameworks, too.
What’s your FBQ (Framework Bloat Quotient)?
(This is a tongue-in-cheek rhetorical question, but it’s still interesting to think about.)
Pick a framework you’re currently using. Somewhere in its documentation will be a list of its
features. What percentage of these are you using? When I’ve asked teams this question in the past,
the most popular answers are in the 10%–20% range. If your number is similar, you’re using the
visible part of the iceberg.
Practice 3 The Best Features Are the Ones You Don’t Ship
I can’t help it. Just like the lab rat pushing the button to get the next food
pellet, I love delivering features—creating and delivering something new.
In the past, I was known for delivering features the customer didn’t even
know they wanted. That’s a superhero play.
It’s also ridiculously stupid.
Every feature we add to our software represents a future liability, because
all that code will need to be supported, maintained, extended, and
understood by new developers.
Idea 7 Feature is marketing speak for future liability
Does that stop everyone adding feature after feature? No.
Should it?
Yes, sometimes.
Need-Driven Development
A basic rule for keeping software simple is Don’t write code unless
someone needs the functionality it provides.i And “wouldn’t it be cool if…”
and “it’d be really easy to add…” don’t count as need.
Idea 8 Don’t write code no one asked for
Obviously, need depends on your context. If your company is creating a
mass-market product, then the marketing folks will likely be keeping an eye
on competitors and creating feature requests to keep up and surpass them.
That’s genuine need.
But if you’re creating software for a single client or internal use, then the
concept of need becomes more interesting. It can also be tainted by politics.
I’ve spoken to managers who have to budget for software development.
Every year they prepare a report saying what they want to build, how much
it will cost, and what value it will produce. They’ll receive back an approval
to spend some amount, normally lower than their request. So what do they
do? They add all the features they think they might need to the project
before they submit it. This both bumps up the budget and acts as a form of
insurance; they don’t want to ask for a baseline project this year only to get
turned down for the extensions they need next year. This applies to both
internal and external clients.
But we can be more agile than that. Back when I was delivering software to
paying customers, I’d flip the equation around. Rather than talking about
need, I’d ask the customer where they’d extract value from the project and
what their priorities were for doing so.
Idea 9 Deliver incremental value, not features
Then the team and I would go away and assign a level of effort to
delivering these values. This is purely internal to the team; we just needed a
sense of how big the task was. The result of the guess would be as simple as
“easy,” “medium,” “difficult,” and “unknown.”
We’d take these rough estimates and compare them to the value they’d
deliver. Assuming the dependencies would allow it, we could then work out
which features we could deliver early that would also give the customer a
decent amount of business value.
Then we’d go back to the customer and say something like this:
We’ve been looking at your requirements, and we think we can give
you some options. This first is a conventional project, where we
deliver the software to you at the end.
With the second option, we’ll deliver the software incrementally,
feature by feature. We looked through your list of values and combined
them with our project planning, and we feel that we can deliver feature
X well before the final project is complete. You should be able to start
using it then, getting business value early. We can talk nearer the time
about subsequent deliveries, but right now we think we might look at
features Y and Z next.
This gives the customer two big wins. First, they can start earning some
value from the software earlier; value now is always better than the same
value later. Second, your customer gets to experience using this first
deliverable. In my experience, when the customer first uses a partial
delivery, they suddenly realize things about the system that weren’t
apparent when it was just some words in a document. They’ll be able to
come back to you with ideas and suggestions for next steps that might be
radically different from their original request. In fact, a while back I had a
customer who took the first two of five feature deliveries and then said the
system did just what they needed; the extra three features were there for
insurance, and they weren’t required.
It also gives you some massive wins. First, you get feedback a lot earlier
than you would have. Ideally you’ll be talking with the customer every
week, but often that just doesn’t happen. But you’ll definitely get their
attention when you deliver something. Second, you start to build a trusting
relationship with them. When the project started, they were taking a risk on
you. When you deliver something, even if it’s not the complete project,
they’ll start feeling a lot more comfortable, and you’ll find that you’ll get
more open and useful interactions with them. Finally, this approach catches
potential problems early: if you have a misunderstanding that would
propagate throughout the code, finding out early stops a whole lot of rework
later.
Idea 10 Complexity grows faster than feature count
Simplicity
You can’t ship software that does nothing. But you can work to reduce the
number of features, delivering only what’s needed, free from unnecessary
embellishments or complications, and delivering it earlier. Features can
always be added later.
Look back
Look back at some projects you’ve delivered. What percentage of the code in each gets used on a
daily basis? What percentage would you guess never gets used?
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Chapter 3
Simplify Your Projects
So far, I’ve been looking at ways we can simplify our approach to the
technologies we use. That’s a good thing because that’s where we have the
most power to change things.
But I have to acknowledge that I’m in a privileged position: I work for
myself, and the majority of code I write is in support of that business.
So when it came time to talk about projects and teams, I reached out. At the
end of 2023 I opened up my calendar and invited teams to chat with me.
Over the next few months I spoke with roughly 50 teams from around the
world.
Two things surprised me. The first was how committed these people were to
doing a good job. They were well aware of what was going well and what
was going badly, and they often had plans to remediate their problems.
The second surprise was how often solutions to a particular problem arose
independently; teams on different continents and in different cultures had
solved a problem using the same techniques.
One question I asked was “Do you consider your team to be successful?”
For those that did, I asked, “What do you think leads to that success?” Here
are three areas they tended to mention:
Communication
Information travels through the team quickly and accurately.
Team members may not agree with each other, but they accept that
others have points of views.
Complementary skills
than another.
Different people handle different tasks, with no task being more valued
Generous with experience
People view it as a responsibility to pass their knowledge and
experience on to their teammates.
In this chapter, we’ll explore these areas, channeling both my own
experience and, more importantly, the experience of all these teams.
As always, this is what worked for me and for them. It might work for you,
too, but don’t just copy and hope. Assess and adapt.
Practice 4 Decouple Your Teams
Any organization that designs a system
(broadly defined) will produce a design
that mirrors the organization’ s
communication structure.
Over the years we developers have
learned a few things about writing
code. We’ve even developed a series of
intuitions, like these:
Melvin Conway1968
Decoupled code is easier to change.
APIs and boundaries make code easier
to ingest.
Small chunks are easier to write than large ones.
Layers of abstractions help tame complexity.
(Why intuitions? Some pundits have the hubris to say that they’ve
developed rules or laws of coding. Ask them when they last wrote a decent-
sized chunk o’ code.)
So it seems obvious to ask if any of our intuitions about writing good code
would let us simplify how projects are run.
I think we can extract some interesting insights by playing with this idea.
Let’s look at how we could apply decoupling to our teams.
Decoupling
Decoupling code is all about managing dependencies to limit the impact of
change.
If two or more pieces of code are coupled, then a change to one might well
break the others—no change is localized. Working with coupled code is a
constant juggling act, and it’s one where gravity always wins.
Team members can also be coupled in this way, and when one person
depends on another, change becomes harder and takes longer. The more
interdependencies, the more fragile the team.
We’re not talking about the code they write here; we’re talking about
processes and practices. Coupling in this context is anything that forces
multiple team members to wait on another team member. In The Pragmatic
Programmer, 20th Anniversary Edition [TH19], I called this temporal
coupling.
Idea 11 Coupling affects both teams and code
Here are some examples of temporal coupling in teams:
Team members work on a single feature at a time. When they are
finished, they cannot proceed until someone else has reviewed their
work.
Hassan’s code is dependent on Jan’s code. Jan is on vacation, so
Hassan cannot proceed.
Jan calls an all-hands meeting at the last moment. People drop what
they’re doing only to end up discussing the selection of drinks in the
vending machine. Everyone is coupled in time: for the length of the
meeting nothing else happens. After the meeting, it takes 10 minutes
for people to end their conversations and another 30 minutes to
regroup and regain the context of what they were doing before the
meeting.
The team uses two-week sprints. Every two weeks, they deliver, have a
retrospective, and do some backlog triage and some planning.
The coupling involved in this is staggering. Individual features must be
synchronized. New work may get stopped until the start of the next
sprint. Everyone drops everything for the chain of meetings. And any
problems cause the whole team to spin.
The Async Life
Too many teams are event driven: if something comes along, you’re
expected to drop what you’re doing to deal with it. Then you have to get
two other people involved, and the rift in concentration spreads like cracks
on thin ice.
In his review of a draft of this book, Noel Rappin raised an interesting
point:
I’ve been on teams that called this “maintenance mode” and then
stayed in it basically indefinitely. (It’s) bad for team morale, you lose
the ability to prioritize your work, and you always feel like you’re on a
treadmill.
I also think that a lot of agile practices have “fallback modes” that
teams can easily get trapped in—the fallback mode is less work than
the full agile practice but also way less effective. I think that event
driven is the fallback mode of agile planning.
Very occasionally, organizing a team as a kind of human event-handling
system is the correct thing to do. But it should not be the default behavior.
Instead, look for ways of decoupling these events, letting people poll for
things they can do, rather than being forced.
Email, shared task lists, and Kanban boards are all ways of decoupling.
When Andy and I were writing the second edition of The Pragmatic
Programmer, we followed the same workflow we used 20 years previously:
someone writes something and passes it over for review. The reviewer
makes changes, then passes it back, and so on until no one has a change to
make, at which point that writing goes into the book. (Where, of course, it
is rewritten again.)
To organize this, we used a Kanban board on GitLab. Each chunk of text
was represented by a card, and the column that the card was in represented
the stage of the workflow. As we swapped content back and forth, we
moved the card into a Review column and changed the assignee to the other
person. That way we communicated asynchronously; when someone
finished a chunk of work, they’d update the board and see immediately any
new tasks.
Idea 12 Find ways to interact asynchronously
Nothing’s revolutionary about this; you might well be doing something
similar with your coding tasks. But what else can you decouple using
something like this? Do you need to wait for the result of a code review, or
could you move on and then fix any internal problems after the review is
complete? Obviously, it depends on what your typical review brings up.
Might be worth exploring, though.
Do you have to couple people’s time by making them attend meetings?
Well, that’s the next practice.
Try this
Keep a list of things that cause you to wait for other people during your working day. For each item,
note the rough time you lost.
After a week or so, group these items into high-level categories, things such as waiting for a meeting
to start or waiting for a code review or need someone else’ s code to finish or waiting for a technical
question to be answered.
For each of these higher-level categories, spend some time thinking about how the wait could be
eliminated or how the effect of the wait can be mitigated. Chat with others on your team to see if
they’re willing to experiment. If so, institute some changes and carry on collecting entries on your
list. At the end of a month or two, total up the time you spent waiting, both before the experiment
and after. Adjust as needed.
Practice 5 Meetings, Bloody Meetings
At the risk of channeling Donald Rumsfeld, for any particular person there
are:
1. Things they know that they know.
2. Things they know that they don’t know.
3. Things they don’t know that they don’t know.
The overall hope when running a meeting is that people in the first group
will help enlighten those in groups two and three, and along the way,
everyone will learn something.
The reality, though, is that meetings are often about those in groups one and
three arguing about their personal realities, and those in group two catching
up on their social media.
Sometimes a meeting is an appropriate tool. Most of the time, though, the
meetings we hold are at best a waste of time and at worst a source of
misinformation, confusion, and resentment.
Clearly, there are many levels of meeting: two people discussing an idea
might be one end of the spectrum, while an all-hands meeting is at the
other. I have nothing at all against two or three people meeting to discuss
something (as long as they are aware of the Practice 6, Decorum: If You
Have to Have a Meeting , guidelines). But I have a strong aversion to large
meetings, and I really dislike the prevalence of all-hands meetings in the so-
called agile world.
But Meetings Are “Agile”
Every “agile” method highlights the importance of communication within
the team. Surely meetings are a great way to ensure that people are all on
the same page. Meetings are the forum for leveling knowledge and sharing
understanding, no?
I don’t think so.
Idea 13 Meetings are not “agile”
And maybe, secretly, the big-A agile folks don’t really believe it either
given the recent trend to relabel meetings as “ceremonies.” (Where did I put
my ermine robe?)
Meetings Are Inefficient
Let’s start this section by reminding ourselves that five minutes spent in a
meeting with 12 participants represents at least a lost hour of overall
productive time.
Why “at least”?
Meetings often start late, and many meetings run over.
Meetings often wait while a small group has a friendly, off-topic chat.
Often there’s a participant who just won’t stop talking, often about
things that may be only tangentially relevant.
Many people won’t have prepared, so the rest of the group will wait
while they are brought up to speed.
And my perennial favorite: the projector doesn’t want to connect to the
presenter’s device.
On top of that, the format of most meetings does not encourage efficiency.
Typically, one person talks, then people chime in with comments, and then
those comments spark other comments, and so on. Then another person
talks, and the comment cascade starts again. If this were an algorithm, it
would be .
Idea 14 The negative impact of a meeting
extends far beyond the meeting room
Meetings Are Unfair
It’s all too easy for a meeting (particularly an online one) to be dominated
by the most senior, most knowledgeable, most aggressive, or just least
polite people present.
Even if you don’t have a verbal bully in the room, shy or junior people
often hold back unless the meeting leader explicitly involves them.
The result: the same people espouse the same viewpoints. Knowledge isn’t
shared; it’s imposed.
Meetings Are Disruptive
Attending a meeting means stopping whatever you’re doing at some
appointed time. If you’re in the middle of something, you have to stop. If
you’re in the flow, you have to stop. If you’re in the middle of a
conversation, you have to stop.
On its own, that can be disruptive. It’s also time-wasting. If I know I have a
meeting coming up, I’ll typically not start something during the period of
about 10 minutes before it starts. Sure, I’ll try to fill in the time, but I won’t
be moving forward. Just as bad, after the meeting is over I have to come
back and recapture the context of what I was doing—I probably waste 15 to
30 minutes coming back up to speed.
Meetings Are Expensive
Let’s look at Scrum, not because it’s worse than the others but because it is
the most common, and its meetings are well documented. In a typical two-
week sprint, a team will have the following all-hands meetings:
Meeting Number Hours/Per Total Hours
Sprint Planning 1 4 4
Backlog Refinement 1 2 2
Daily Scrum 10 ¼ 2½
Sprint Review 1 2 2
Retrospective 1 3 3
TOTAL 13½
For one sprint, that’s 13½ hours out of the total of 80 hours. If the overhead
cost of a developer is $200/hour, and you have a team of 10 people, that’s
$27,000 every two weeks.
Is this time and money well spent?
Perhaps it is. But the only way to know is to measure, and the only way I
can see to measure is to change what you do and see what the impact is.
So that’s what this section is: a series of things that other teams have
successfully adopted to overcome the problems with meetings. Let’s start
by establishing just why we have meetings.
(Oh, and if you were wondering about the title of this practice, have a look
at this marvelous John Cleese training video.[1])
Idea 15 Meetings are inefficient, unfair, disruptive, and
expensive
Why Meet at All?
I asked people why they had so many meetings. Ignoring the “because that’s
what we do” answers, here’s what I heard:
The daily standup gives people a chance to say what they’ve done,
what they plan to do, and what problems they have. The intent is to
help the team understand the overall context and perhaps to give
individuals the chance to offer advice on problems someone else is
facing.
Design sessions help to thrash out architecture, design, and
implementation issues. Alternatives are discussed, new ideas are
injected, and more junior team members learn about new languages,
frameworks, and patterns.
Planning meetings give the team context, helping them understand
what work is to be done and what the priorities are. It also gives folks
a sense of ownership of the schedule.
The review meetings are an opportunity for the team to celebrate
successes and to understand, mitigate, and perhaps forgive, failures.
All-hands meetings are also felt to be team-building events, where
people get to know each other better and possibly trust each other
more.
Are there other, more efficient ways, of getting the same benefits?
Developer Without Portfolio
Many of the successful teams I met with had created a new role. Some
called it project lead, but to my mind that title has other baggage. Some
called it architect, but again there’s baggage. So I’m going to use developer
without portfolio, or DWP.
The DWP’s sole responsibility is to keep the team running smoothly and
effectively. If the team is an engine, the DWP is the oil.
Idea 16 Developer without portfolio reduces team
friction
To do this, the DWP talks with people. Not by having weekly meetings or
daily chats, but by actually engaging. I spoke with a team where the DWP
spent a lot of their time pair programming with random team members. On
another team, the DWP would carry their laptop into different areas and set
up shop, listening in to what was happening and chatting where appropriate.
There’s no rule here: it’s up to the personality of the individual. Whatever
mode they choose, though, the outcome should be the same: they should
know what everyone is doing, their pain points and misunderstandings,
their successes and their frustrations.
Knowing all this, the DWP then works to remove impediments.
Replacing the Daily Standup Meeting
The DWP is constantly building a picture of the team’s overall situation,
sharing and updating it as they circulate through the team. They make a
point of asking people what they’re planning to do and what problems
they’re facing.
When people describe their plans, the DWP can slot that into the overall
project context. They may discover that the planned work might not be
needed, or they may notice that another team member had written some
code that might help.
If the developer is having problems, the DWP will come up with ways to
help. For small issues, this might be as simple as directly explaining
something to the developer. For bigger things, though, the DWP’s job is to
put the developer in touch with other team members who can help.
During this process, the DWP is also monitoring progress.
Streamlining the Review Meetings
The DWP will already have a good picture of how a development has gone.
They will have seen issues and misunderstandings arise, notice tasks where
estimates were off, and seen people succeed or struggle.
So rather that the typical “so let’s go ’round the room” review, the DWP can
circulate their observations ahead of the meeting, allowing the team to
focus on resolutions.
Streamlining Design Meetings
The DWP is explicitly not the team architect and should have no special
authority when it comes to design decisions. However, of all the team’s
members, the DWP probably has the best overall picture of what is needed.
Combined with the DWP’s experience, this puts them into a good position
to make suggestions and outline alternatives when it comes to design.
At the same time, design is often best when done collaboratively, which
probably calls for meetings. My strong suggestion: limit the attendance to
three or four people and try to follow the decorum guidelines at the end of
the chapter.
You Expect Us to Add an Extra Team Member Who Isn’t
Coding?
I don’t expect it, but I hope you’ll try it.
If you need help justifying it, add up the developer hours currently spent in
meetings. For the team of 10 developers we talked about in Meetings Are
Expensive , that figure comes to about 135 hours per two-week sprint. If you
eliminate those meetings by adding a DWP, that’s equivalent to adding over
one and a half extra developers to the team. Even if you only halve the time
spent in meetings, you’ve freed up the equivalent of 80 percent of one
developer’s time. The other advantages of a DWP will easily make up the
extra 20 percent.
Some Meetings Are Unavoidable
All-hands meetings are definitely appropriate when they address things that
genuinely impact the entire team, such as project inception, large project
windup, and company announcements. If you have any control over these,
try to follow the meeting decorum guidelines that follow.
Other meetings will also be necessary: design sessions, management
reporting, subteam coordination, and so on. Keep these small—you can
always bring people in if needed. Follow meeting decorum.
Try this
Discuss the concept of a developer without portfolio, first with your team and later with managers. If
everyone’s on board, run an experiment.
Decide what metrics are important, and make sure you have them available for the three months
before the experiment.
During this time, cast around for someone who can take on the DWP role. They should be fairly
experienced, enjoy chatting with people, and be capable of putting aside their own opinions.
Then take a couple of months migrating to the new way of working and start collecting the metrics
again. Six months later, compare metrics and decide whether to continue.
All I ask is that, alongside all the regular performance metrics, you also include some measures of
developer sentiment.
Practice 6 Decorum: If You Have to Have a Meeting
The meetings I dread are announced when someone says, “Let’s get a group
together and talk about X.” It’s pretty much guaranteed that such an ad hoc
meeting will be unstructured, unproductive, and potentially unpleasant.
I’m not totally against meetings. But if a meeting has to happen, then we
should do our best to make it pleasant and productive. And that means that
someone has to take responsibility for organizing it and running it.
Running a meeting considerately and effectively involves the following:
Having a clear objective
Verifying that a meeting is needed
Preparation
Selecting attendees
Scheduling
Direction
Wrap-up and follow-up
This is all basic stuff, but it’s normally ignored or done half-heartedly. This
is one of those times where simplicity (and efficiency) comes from
following the rules.
Idea 17 The only good meeting is a well-prepared one
Clear Objective
The objective is the answer to the question, “Why do I want to have this
meeting, anyway?”
As with every agile action, this objective must be measurable: did the
meeting achieve what it was meant to?
This means that the objective you set must be bounded and measurable.
Here are some good objectives:
Plan the handover of the sales module from the red team to the blue
team.
This can be verified at the end of the meeting by getting the
participants to run through the plan.
Agree support staff vacation schedule over the holiday season.
The verification is that you walk away with a calendar showing when
every support person is available and that there are no gaps in
coverage.
Ensure operations have what they need to migrate the database
schema.
Before the meeting ends, you’ll want to run through the migration plan
and have everyone agree that it seems solid.
Here are some bad meeting objectives:
Discuss the deployment of the next release.
Nothing’s wrong with discussion, but it’s not an objective. What is the
result of all the talking? How can you measure it? The objective needs
to be clear and specific.
Improve project estimates.
Perhaps a worthy goal, but there’s no measurable outcome from the
meeting itself. Perhaps the meeting objective is "Identify one thing that
a previous estimate got wrong and come up with a way to prevent a
recurrence."
Is a Meeting Needed?
All too often, meetings are called because it’s easier than doing the work.
So be honest with yourself—could you save overall effort if you invested
some time yourself and spared other team members.
The previous example of agreeing vacation dates is a good example. Why
do you need everyone in a room when you all have access to a shared
calendar? Sure, there may be conflicts, and that’s where you’ll need to
invest some energy. But in terms of overall effort, it’s a clear win.
Be creative when it comes to avoiding unnecessary meetings.
Flip This Meeting
When I went to school, we learned lessons during school time and then
tested our knowledge with homework.
Some schools now turn that on its head. In the flipped-classroom model,
students learn the material on their own, before the class, using materials
prepared by the teacher. They then attend the lesson, where the class works
on activities that solidify that understanding, while the teacher offers
guidance and help.
Too often we run meetings like traditional school rooms. You attend to hear
a lecture and then get assigned work to do back at your desk.
There’s never an excuse to give a long lecture in a meeting; you brought
your colleagues together to solve a problem, not listen to the issues.
So flip your meetings. Before you even announce the meeting, prepare
materials that you’ll give to attendees before they arrive. These materials
will cover any background they need, so everyone can hit the ground
running once they’re together.
Idea 18 Flip meetings: share before, examine during
Depending on your style, you may choose to create an agenda. My
recommendation here is to try meetings both with and without one and see
which goes better.
I find a secret benefit of doing this. Often, as I prepare the materials, I find
myself realizing that I misunderstood the problem. The need for the meeting
evaporates. Everyone wins.
Selecting Attendees
Parsimony is the name of the game here. Once you’ve prepared your
briefing materials, choose the key people who need to be there, the people
who are needed to reach an outcome. Send them a summary and ask if they
feel they should attend. If they agree, perhaps ask if your attendee list is
missing anyone.
The smaller the group, the better the discussion and the faster the meeting.
Scheduling
A bunch of folklore surrounds the best time to schedule meetings. Avoid the
slot after lunch; people are sleepy. Avoid the end of the day; people want to
go home. Avoid Monday morning; people are busy catching up. And so on.
I don’t think there’s one good time to have meetings. But you can be
considerate of other people. Remember that a meeting basically interrupts
whatever all the attendees were doing. Maybe try to schedule meetings that
start at natural breaks—first thing in the morning, perhaps.
And if you have people in many time zones, be considerate. If the working
days just don’t overlap, alternate who has to get up early.
Or, better yet, don’t have a meeting.
Direct
If you’ve arranged a meeting, then it’s your responsibility to make sure that
everyone gets value from it, and that means that you’re going to have to
guide things along.
Start on time, and don’t recapitulate for latecomers.
Make sure everyone understands what the measurable outcomes of the
meeting are. If you have an agenda, follow it.
Make sure everyone is heard. This may involve gently shutting down folks
who like to talk. Sometimes two people will get into a debate. That’s fine
for one or two exchanges, but after that step in with “So Jan thinks X and
Pat thinks Y . Anyone have any thoughts?”
I hate meetings where multiple discussions happen at once. A classic way to
avoid having to police this is to bring some kind of token to meetings and
make a rule that people can only speak when they’re in possession of that
token; yes, it’s a real-world semaphore. If nothing else, a whole lot of quiet
satisfaction is to be derived from telling a VP that they can’t speak yet
because they don’t have Mr. Squeaky.
One of the roles of the person who called the meeting is to moderate the
discussion, preventing these private discussions, while also encouraging the
quiet participants to say their piece. In the end, if the moderator models, and
if necessary enforces, respect, people will learn.
One of the trickiest parts of running a meeting is pacing. You want to make
sure you achieve the meeting’s objective at or before the end time. I’ve
found it useful to jot down some milestones and times before the meeting
starts. Not only does this help get the timing right, it also gives you a kind
of road map to steer the conversation.
A rookie mistake is to reach the end of a meeting and then simply disperse.
Always allow a couple of minutes for a wrap-up.
Wrap Up. Follow Up
Remember, your meeting needs a measurable objective. Simply having
everyone agree is not enough. Run through the outcome, stating each point
of agreement, and make sure you or the meeting scribe writes it down.
Thank everyone for their time. Send them on their way at or before the
scheduled end time.
After the meeting, take some time to compare the actual outcome to the
target. Did your meeting achieve what you wanted? Either way, jot a quick
note to every attendee summarizing what was done and how it will affect
things going forward.
Exploratory Meetings
In one kind of meeting these suggestions don’t apply. An example is the
initial get-together of the 17 middle-aged white guys (sad, but true) where
we created the Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Going in, the
only thing we knew was that we wanted to compare ideas about software
development practices and possibly find some common ground. We had no
plan and no agenda.
Idea 19 Exploratory meetings have different rules
We started by removing the table and organizing the chairs in an oval. After
we introduced ourselves, someone passed around a bunch of index cards.
We each wrote down things we felt were important to discuss, one thing per
card. We then had a lot of fun seeing how accurately we could frisbee the
cards into a pile.
We took a break while someone organized the cards into topics, and then
we held a dot vote to set the order we’d address them. That order held for
maybe 90 minutes, but by then we’d covered enough ground that we came
up with an initial set of “we value X over Y” statements over lunch.
Exploratory meetings are very different from decision-making meetings,
and they’re a lot harder to get right. I know some people will only hold
exploratory meetings if they hire an external moderator to run them. I’ve
only experienced one such meeting; I have to say it went very well.
Dot Votes
A dot vote allows a group of people to collectively choose
among options. The distinguishing feature is that every person
gets more than one vote. They can use all their votes on a single
item or spread votes between many items. In the end, the
number of votes an item has garnered determines its rank.
For a list of 10 items, you’d normally give everyone three or
maybe four votes. Sometimes you may want to give
stakeholders an extra vote or two to increase their influence on
the outcome.
It’s called a dot vote because traditionally you wrote the items
on a whiteboard and then people went up and put colored dots
against their choices.
Try this
If your role is typically that of a meeting attendee, and not an organizer, you’re in a great position to
learn what works and what doesn’t. Maybe take notes (discretely); one day you’ll be running your
own meetings. These notes will help you hit the ground running.
Model decorum
This one can be difficult. When you attend meetings, try to act the way you wish everyone else
would act. See if you can get some like-minded colleagues to go along.
Run simple
If part of your role is to run meetings, start to introduce these practices. Explain to attendees what
you’re doing and why you’re doing it. Ask for their help. And remember to get feedback.
And remember:
Idea 20 Play nicely
Practice 7 Spread Your Skills
I learned a surprising lesson back in the
In learning, you will teach, and in
teaching, you will learn.
mid 2000s. A conference I was
attending had organized a room where
Phil CollinsSon of Man
programmers who were just starting out
could pair with more experienced
attendees. I went in for a couple of
hours; at that point I was most likely one of the western world’s most
experienced Ruby programmers. It would be good to bestow nuggets of
wisdom on some lucky students.
In those couple of hours I probably learned more about programming than I
had in the previous two years. After half-a-dozen years of programming
Ruby, I’d settled into a style that worked for me; I attacked problems in the
same way, and I used the same idioms while coding. And the students I sat
with undermined all of that with just one word.
Why?
Why are you using each to write for-loops? Why do array indices start at
zero? Why do you always call your index variables i? Why, why, why?
It was like coding with precocious three-year-olds. But every single
question made me stop and think. I’m sure they were surprised when they
asked a seemingly basic question and I went quiet for 30 seconds, trying to
come up with a reason that could survive inspection.
It wasn’t just their questions. I also had to reach way inside to come up with
ways to explain concepts to newcomers to the craft. How could I describe a
Hash or a File object in ways that both made sense and that were useful
abstractions?
I came away from these sessions both pumped up and exhausted. And I’d
learned something that most of you already know. To quote Phil Collins, “In
teaching you will learn.”
Sharing Skills Amplifies Skills
If you share your candy bar, you end up eating less of it. But if you share
your skills, both your student and you end up with more. It’s a positive-sum
[2]
game.
And that’s the selfish reason to share—it makes you a better developer.
Idea 21 Teach to learn
But obviously, there’s another side to the equation: the person you share
with is also gaining from your experience and wisdom. They get stronger,
and your team gets stronger.
Equality Is Not the Goal
If ever there was a team whose every member was equally proficient in
every skill, it would be horribly inefficient. Specialization allows the team
to benefit from the variety of knowledge and experience of its members.
This variety also increases the team’s resilience.
Marmorkrebs crayfish, cheetahs, and the Channel Island fox are examples
of species with very little genetic diversity between members. This makes
them fragile. If an environmental change or disease affects one, it affects
them all.
It’s the same with homogeneous teams. If they are all experts in Java and
Oracle, and the world moves to Postgres and JavaScript, the team as a
whole is suddenly obsolete.
Let’s try to visualize this. We’ll assume a team has five members. Each has
varying experience, rated 0 to 5, in three databases (Postgres, Oracle, and
MySQL), three languages (Java, JavaScript, and Rust), and three
environments (back end, front end, and SPAs). We’ll capture the nine
experience numbers from each team member and represent them in a grid:
databases in the first column, languages in the second, and environments in
the third. Around each number we’ll draw a circle whose area is
proportional to that number. Here’s what this might look like for a team
where each member has different skills:
Now let’s work out the skills of the team as a whole. We can’t just add all
the corresponding numbers: if member 1 has level 4 experience in Oracle
and member 2 is level 3, then the chances are good that a lot of what they
know overlaps. So, for no other reason that it seemed to be a good idea, I
calculated a total experience for each topic by sorting the individual values
and giving the first a weighting of , the next , then , , and .
After cranking the adding machine handle, we get the following:
That looks like a pretty healthy coverage.
Now let’s look at the homogeneous team, with all their skills in Oracle,
Java, and back-end development.
The overall team skills are looking a little sparse. And compare the top row
in the team skills box to the top row for the team with mixed skills. Even
though people in the first team are weaker individually in Oracle, Java, and
back-end development, the overall team skills for those three areas are not
much lower: when you add skills, there’s a lot of overlap.
Idea 22 All experience is useful. Diverse experience
teaches more
When you’re building teams, by all means look for the skills you directly
need, but not to the exclusion of the occasional wild card. If you’re
choosing a team to join, you’ll learn more if their main focus is slightly
outside your personal comfort zone. Diversity is resiliency, both among
members of an animal species and between developers on a team.
Become a teacher and a student
Get used to the quiet rhythm of helping people—sharing your experience without being intrusive.
If you find yourself wanting to correct someone, stop and think before acting. What led them to
make the mistake? Rather than fixing the problem, could you explore the cause of the problem with
them and let them work out the fix for themselves?
And if someone finds a problem in your work, try not to react defensively. Instead, think about what
they said. If you understand the issues, thank them. If you don’t, ask them to dig a little deeper so
you can learn the underlying cause of your mistake.
What good teachers do
Most of us probably have a teacher or two who changed our lives for the better; mine was Mr.
Knight, code name Albert, who taught maths (yes, it had an “s”; it was in England) and was also my
homeroom teacher for three years.
These key teachers have a way of engaging that makes you feel part of the learning process; you’re
engaged because they are. It’s partly a question of personality but also has aspects that can be
learned.
Good teachers feel they have a mission, and they like to talk about it. I find it encouraging (and
humbling) to read their stories. Here’s a short list of things I read while writing this:
https://www.nu.edu/blog/qualities-of-a-good-teacher/
https://www.teachersoftomorrow.org/blog/insights/good-teacher-qualities/
https://www.wgu.edu/blog/top-qualities-skills-good-teacher2001.html
You’ll need to adjust these, as they’re aimed at a classroom environment, but then again, good
teachers are adaptable.
Thank a teacher today
Is that special teacher in your life still around? Why not get in touch and thank them. See what
they’re up to. And rehear all the horror stories of when you were in school.
If you’re a parent, maybe your children have a teacher that changed them. Perhaps an informal
“thank you” at the end of the school year might be in order.
Practice 8 Let the Information Go Free
Communication involves more than the mechanics of person A
communicating with person B. The successful teams I spoke with all
insisted that information needs to be freely available. Some talked about
making it easy to ask, and others talked about creating the kind of
environment where information is ambient and team members absorb much
of it without even realizing it. Whatever you do, communication needs
active management so that information can flow.
Let’s look at some ideas.
Eliminate Information Silos
It’s only natural. If you work as part of a small team on a particular corner
of a project, you become invested in that team. Your team probably has its
own jargon specific to the concepts in your code, and you use shorthand to
talk about functionality and design. As time goes on, this makes it
increasingly difficult to talk about your work with other developers; before
you can chat about the cool stuff, you’d have to fill them in on a lot of
background.
As a result, we tend not to bother. Information and knowledge become
localized to each small team, forming information silos.
Idea 23 Knowledge hoarded is knowledge that’s rotting
But knowledge shared is knowledge multiplied. When you share knowledge
with others, you’re not just giving it away. You’re giving them new ideas
that augment their existing knowledge. And those new ideas don’t just sit
there; they interact with all the existing ideas, synthesizing brand-new
intuitions. The sum of two pieces of knowledge is more than two pieces of
knowledge.
Spread Yourself Around
Here are some ways that teams that value knowledge transfer make it work.
First, they make it explicit that everyone on the team has something to teach
and something to learn. They explain the big difference between teaching
and just telling someone what to do; teaching is a process of discovery,
where the teacher acts as a guide and a coach and not as an all-knowing
oracle. The teams are encouraged to ask questions and discuss issues. And
they’re also told that sometimes the answers have to be discovered through
experimentation: the old orient-step-learn loop.
Given that background and given that we’ve discovered that mixing things
up makes them stronger, these successful teams all use one or more of the
following to help disperse skills.
Pair programming
Rotate pairs fairly frequently, and make sure that everyone gets to pair
with everyone else over time.
Developer without portfolio
One of the DWP responsibilities is to put people with a question in
touch with people with an answer. Sometimes, the DWP doesn’t even
wait for the explicit question: if they spot someone struggling, they’ll
ask someone to wander over and help.
Brown-bag lunches
Folks get together over lunch and discuss things that interest them.
Sometimes these are book clubs, where they discuss a chapter a week.
Sometimes they ask members to take turns talking about something
cool they found.
Developer shuffle
Every few months the department plays musical chairs, moving one
developer from each team to another. This obviously spreads
knowledge. But it also gives individuals a chance to experience
different problem domains—sometimes people find their passion this
way. It also has a couple of interesting side effects. First, projects that
have been stuck for a while often get a fresh perspective. Second,
when a team inducts a new member, they get to see their code through
fresh eyes, often triggering a round of cleanup and refactoring.
Code reviews
Have people from outside the team perform code reviews.
Mob rule
Merge several teams for a day and have them mob code a solution to
one of the more general problems they need to solve: improving
logging, speeding up the build, updating libraries, or whatever.
Skill mix
Construct teams containing people with complementary skills. This
way, the team can’t help but share knowledge.
Experience diversity
Construct teams containing people with different levels of experience.
Junior developers will benefit from the experience of the old hands. At
the same time, the questions the juniors ask will often trigger the old
hands to think about things they’ve taken for granted. I personally love
being in both roles at different times. I’m always learning new things.
One thing to avoid: the difference in experience should not be so great
that the two developers just can’t communicate. Very experienced
developers work largely by intuition and not using the more
prescriptive patterns used by beginners. Often, the only answer a
wizard can give is “it’s obvious,” which helps no one.
Formal training
If a department changes one of their technology platforms, they often
set aside a few days to help people get up to speed. I’ve heard mixed
reports on these sessions; in some cases they go really well, and in
others people come away not much wiser. I suspect the difference
comes down to the preparation and the enthusiasm of the teacher.
Friday playtime
A couple of teams I contacted set aside a half day a week for non-
project work. They encourage people to pair, where one person in the
pair instigates the project and the second person wants to learn about
it. These projects could involve working on tools, learning a new
language, experimenting with ESP32s—whatever sounds interesting.
Idea 24 Knowledge shared is knowledge multiplied
The “Friday playtime” example illustrates an important point. Skills
transfer (and learning in general) does not have to be focused on work-
related technologies to be beneficial. Software is one of those industries
where skills transfer easily between specialties.
However…
In his review of a draft of this book, Noel Rappin made a great point:
In larger organizations you really, really need management buy-in to
make a lot of these things work because they all work against manager
incentives, which are normally focused on the short term.
If management doesn’t agree, everybody will continually beg off doing
these kinds of things because they are too busy.
And, of course, persuading higher-management needs communication
skills…
Pick an activity
Choose something from the preceding list that your team is not currently doing and try to make it
happen. This may involve selling it to other team members and possibly some negotiating with
management. Tell them Dave sent you.
Footnotes
[1]
[2]
https://vimeo.com/709207228
https://www.britannica.com/topic/positive-sum-game
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Part 2
Simplify Your Environment
Chapter 4
Automate All the Things
I have an arachnoid cyst in my brain. It’s a 6 cm void in my left temporal
lobe where hearing discrimination and part of my memory is supposed to
be. As a result, I can’t make out what people are saying when I’m in a
crowd, and I can’t remember the stuff I want to remember (yet I can recall
the license plate number of my first car).
I compensate for the first with a combination of lip-reading and laughing
when other people laugh. For the second, I try to offload stuff to external
devices: my daybook,[3] lists, calendars, notes on the fridge, and so on.
When it comes to software, one of my most important techniques for
dealing with my lack of brain mass is automation. The more I automate, the
less I have to remember. If I can deploy by pushing a button or typing a
command, I don’t have to scrabble around to find a checklist. (It also means
I won’t miss step 17.)
If I automatically run tests when I save a source file, I don’t have to have
some part of my brain looping around asking me “did you run the tests?” If
I automate my environment setup, then I won’t waste time tracking down
why some library version is wrong.
I don’t think I’m alone in this. The good developers I watch all create
automations to reduce the cognitive load of creating software. The less we
have to remember, the less stress we have. We’re happier, and we create
better software.
So here are some of the areas I automate. As always, your focus will be
different from mine, and the tools you choose are up to you.
Practice 9 Make Your Desktop Work for You
I spend far too long every day looking at a rectangle of dark plastic covered
by what my wife calls “teeny-tiny writing.” This is my window into the
abstraction we call software development. I use it to create and maintain
code, to run programs, to do research, and to watch cat videos.
It makes sense to do as much as I can to tailor this environment to both my
needs and the projects I’m working on. That involves two main things:
trying every single damn color scheme I can find and automating as much
as I can.
Workspaces
Like everyone, I do many different things during the day. Sometimes I’m
writing books, other times updating the PragProg tool chain, handling
email, or looking at social media and the web.
Like many people, I don’t have much discipline. I could be coding away
and then the email window updates, so of course I have to stop what I’m
doing to see what just came in. I know I shouldn’t, but…
Idea 25 Organize your desktop as you organize your
time
My solution to this is to set up workspaces. These are complete desktops,
each with their own windows and apps, which I can switch between on my
display. It’s like having multiple displays but arranged so you can only look
at one at a time.
One desktop has my email and a browser window (because answering an
email often involves accessing some web content).
If I’m writing, I’ll have a workspace containing my editor, my book builder,
and a PDF previewer. (Here’s what it looks like, although my fonts are
smaller IRL.)
I’ll then have a workspace for each project I’m working on.
The joy of this setup is that I can switch away from what I’m doing and
then later switch back to find it exactly as I left it. I don’t get distracted, and
I’m less likely to end up with a screen containing 168 overlapping
windows.
This simplifies my life tremendously while making me feel more
productive.
What Do I Use?
I do most of my work on OS X, wandering over to my Linux box every
now and then. On the Mac, I used to use the built-in Spaces feature of OS
X. That could be painful at times, and the lack of full keyboard control was
annoying. Now I use a tiling window manager and love it.
Windows are laid out in horizontal and vertical stacks, and they don’t
overlap. Initially I thought this was going to be a showstopper for me, but
I’ve actually come to appreciate how much cleaner it feels to use. And, with
full keyboard control, I can fling windows between workspaces without
reaching for a mouse.
Watch yourself working
You might not think that it’s worth the hassle of learning a window manager’s key-bindings; it might
not be.
But do me a favor—watch how you currently manage your screen real estate while you work. Are
you doing a lot of alt-tabbing to find the window you want? Do you periodically have to go on a
window purge? Do you have to use a mouse to navigate?
If so, it might be worth experimenting for a week with a tool that can manage your windows and
workspaces.
Try out workspaces
If you’re not currently using workspaces, have a look around for tools that let you try it in your
environment.
Give it a go for a week. It will take you a couple of days to get the configuration set the way you
want. After that, try to develop the habit to partition your work, and see if the experience works for
you.
Try out window managers
Even if you’re not sold on the idea of workspaces, play around with tiling window managers—there
are many to choose from. If you’ve never used one, you might be frustrated at first: you’re used to
having 207 windows open, and that just doesn’t work when they’re all visible. Perhaps that’s the
point. Do you really need all 207 windows at the same time?
Practice 10 Make Your Terminal Work for You
First things first. I live in the terminal, but many of you do not. I try hard
not to tell you what to do, but I’m about to make an exception.
Idea 26 Effective developers know their way around the
terminal
I use the terminal because it gives me superpowers. Everything that I can do
with the computer is only a few keystrokes away. Even better, I can
combine commands in lots of different ways: I can run them sequentially,
send the output of one to the input of another, or use one command as the
argument to another. I’m working with plain text, and over the years people
have developed large numbers of utilities that will process that text in any
way imaginable.
When you do all of your work through GUI applications, you’re limited to
the capabilities built into those apps. This is sometimes referred to as What
You See Is All You Get (as opposed to What You See Is What You Get, or
WYSIWYG). For specialist tasks, such as image editing, this is acceptable.
But productive programmers have unpredictable needs. Knowing your shell
simplifies how you work when you reach the limits of your GUI
applications.
When you use your terminal, you have access to the entire underlying
operating system; I can write scripts and combine applications to achieve
pretty much anything I might need.
Here are some terminal commands that illustrate the kind of things I do on a
daily basis:
# rename all the .ts files in src/ to have a .bak extension
$ mv src/
*
.{ts,bak}
# How many words do I have in my book (ish)
$ wc -w
**
md
# Build the book from source whenever a file changes
$ ls
**
md | entr ./rake clean screen
# Where have I used the English spelling of color (in any case)?
$ rg -i colour
# Fetch a JSON document containing information on the Pokemon Mewtwo,
# and print a list of its moves
$ curl -s
'https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/pokemon/mewtwo'
| jq -r
'
.moves[] |
.move.name'
OK, so I don’t fetch Pokemon information on a daily basis (or ever, really).
But I do use a similar-looking command to try out JSON APIs and
sometimes to produce ad hoc reports from my own systems.
Shell? Terminal? What’s the Difference?
Back when dinosaurs roamed the earth, we connected to central computers
over phone lines. To do this, we used a terminal: a device with a keyboard
and a means of displaying characters (initially a paper roll and a typewriter
mechanism and later a CRT display).
Once we connected, we had to have a way of interacting with the machine
and telling it what to do. Typically it worked this way: the computer would
get notified that an incoming line was ringing. It would answer the call and
establish a data connection. It would then spawn a program, attaching its
input and output to that connection. Everything the user typed would be
sent to this program, and everything the program output would be sent back
to the terminal.
This program had various names, but people eventually settled on shell or
command shell.
Today’s computers are structured differently but still use the same basic
idea. Creating a new window establishes a connection to an application.
One kind of application is a terminal emulator, which pretends to be a very
sophisticated physical terminal. Rather than calling our computer using the
phone, it establishes a connection by opening a device called a pseudo-
teletype, or pty. When that connection is made, the operating system gets a
notification exactly as if the phone had rung, and it accepts the call and
starts a shell.
So two components cooperate to let you type commands at your computer:
the terminal and the shell. And, lucky you, there are a wide variety of both
to choose from—you can totally own how it looks and works.
Getting Started
The terminal is just an application like any other. Most computers ship with
a terminal app: on OS X it’s called Terminal, on Linux it might be xterm,
and on Windows the default is called cmd.
These terminals work well, and they’re probably the ones you should use
when getting started. Eventually you’ll probably want to install more
sophisticated terminal apps, which I’ll talk about in a bit.
Where I have the most fun is the shell.
All shells have the same basic functions. They prompt you to enter
commands and then run those commands. They let you redirect where those
commands get their input from and where their output goes. They keep a
history of the commands you enter, and they let you recall and edit previous
commands.
The feature that simplifies my life the most is called completion. As I’m
typing, I can hit the ⇥ key, and the shell will try to complete what I’m
typing with something that makes sense given the context: a command
name, a file name, or even options specific to the command I’m trying to
run.
All shells also support scripting, where you can automate a sequence of
commands using their own built-in language.
Extras That I Look For: The Terminal
When evaluating a terminal program, here’s what I look for:
Speed
Nowadays the baseline for terminal emulators is to use GPU rendering,
so output should scroll by very quickly. (I just tried it on my Mac
Mini, and my terminal scrolled through a 16,000-line file in 45 ms.)
Scrollback
The terminal should be able to retain at least the last 2,000 lines of
output, and ideally more. Modern log files are incredibly verbose, and
you sometimes need that kind of buffer to scroll back to the actual
error.
Themes
It sounds trivial, but I’ve worked hard to select a theme that doesn’t
leave me with sore eyes or a headache at the end of a day.
Key mapping
It’s very convenient to be able to have both my terminal and my editor
use the same keys for things such as window switching.
Multiple panes/windows
For me, this is a must; a short explanation is next.
Idea 27 The terminal does the presentation
Multiple Panes
I want a terminal that lets me split my window into multiple panes and run a
separate shell in each pane. I need the layout of these panes to be
configurable, and I want to be able to control the font sizes in each pane
independently (because I often leave logs scrolling in a separate window,
tucked out of the way but still visible).
Some people do this using a terminal multiplexer—tmux is the poster child
for this. I don’t need all the fancy session management stuff that tmux
provides, so running it means yet one more set of key sequences to learn.
Instead, I use a terminal that lets me create and layout panes directly, using
just the keyboard. I then set up key mappings so that the same sequences
move me between terminal windows and editor buffers.
Extras I Look For: The Shell
I have fallen in love with contextual command completion. Every shell lets
you type edit intro ⇥ ; it will look for a file whose name starts “intro” and
suggest the available names for you to pick.
Most shells will also provide a similar thing at the command level. Type
ed ⇥ and it will suggest commands starting with “ed”.
Contextual completion takes this a step further and remembers the
commands you entered and the directory you were in when you entered
them. The shell will then preferentially suggest completions that match the
current directory.
It sounds trivial, but in practice it makes a major difference, particularly if
you set up different workspaces for different tasks. When you switch to a
new workspace, your shell makes suggestions that are local to the directory
of that workspace, increasing the feeling of each space being distinct.
I also look for a decent scripting language. Many shells are POSIX
compliant, and their scripting languages look similar. The languages are
powerful but also incredibly arcane. I’m not a full-time writer of shell
scripts, so I’d like to be able to code at a more humane level.
Idea 28 The shell gives you power
My Current Daily Drivers
On my Macs I use Kitty as my terminal and Fish as my shell. You should
choose for yourself—test out different options until you find ones that work
for you.
Explore, experiment, play, optimize, and customize
Do you currently use your terminal app? If not, start it up and play with it. See how to change
your current directory, list the files in it, display a text file on the terminal, and search for all
occurrences of some word in all the files in the directory.
If you don’t use your terminal, the next time you need to update your local files from your
version control repository, work out how to do it from the terminal. After that, see if you can
build and run the project.
Customize your terminal: set up the keyboard shortcuts and the color scheme that suits you.
Customize your shell—many a happy hour can be spent getting your prompt just right. Have a
look online for some of the totally over-the-top prompts people have created.
How long can you go without using a mouse? It took some time, but now when coding I can
go all day. How about you?
If you’re an experienced terminal and shell user, keep a list of things that frustrate you about
the experience. Once in a while, scan for new or updated terminals and shells that might
alleviate the problem.
Practice 11 Automate Everything Else
When I were a lad, we’d build our systems by running compilers and then
linking the object files into an executable image. We’d then manually copy
that image up to some other computer, edit a few configuration files, restart
the target machine, and hope.
Not surprisingly, building and deploying was always a scary business, and
we frequently crashed systems, deployed the wrong app versions, and
generally messed up production systems in every imaginable way.
Today, we have plenty of tools that handle the building, deploying, and
updating of our systems. They ensure consistency and repeatability and
often let you roll releases back in case of problems.
These tools are perhaps the biggest factor contributing to the reliability of
our running applications.
Idea 29 Automation == Reliability
From a developer’s viewpoint, they are also massively simpler and less
stressful than the manual alternatives.
All of which makes it insane that there are still teams who don’t use them.
Automate First, Code Second
I use a trivial trick to make sure that I don’t leave automating my projects to
chance.
When I start a new project, the first hour or so is always spent getting the
environment set up. Sometimes I’m using a framework that generates much
of it for me; other times I start with a bare directory and create the structure
for myself.
Whichever path I take, I have a rule. Before I write a line of application
code, I have to be able to do these things:
1. Delete my local copy of the project files and reconstitute them from a
version control system somewhere.
2. Install all my project dependencies with a single command.
3. Use a single command to build my project from source (although that
source will probably just be a “Hello, World!” program).
4. Run my tests, either automatically as part of the build or with a single
command.
5. Deploy my project to its target environment.
That sounds like a lot of work. In practice, if you do this regularly, you’ll
quickly build up a set of template projects that have all of these features in
place, requiring just a little customization.
But why do this before I have any code? Because I’ve learned (the hard
way) that if I don’t, then I’ll keep pushing it off; getting the next feature
working always seems like a higher priority than administrative
housekeeping.
In the past, I was normally pretty good about steps one through four.
Deployment, though, tended to be an afterthought. And as a result, it was
always a nightmare.
If instead you deploy your application on day zero, it should be simple. You
have no additional environment to set up, no database to initialize, no
mailer to configure, no message queue to start—you’re just running “Hello,
World!” on some other machine. Get that working, and then start adding to
your app. As you do, keep deploying it. At some point you’ll need a
database, so on the next deploy you’ll need to work out how to provision it
and initialize the schema.
But doing that as you go along is so much simpler than trying to get the
entire finished application configured and running at the same time. If you
leave deployment to the end, then you’ll have to get every moving part
working perfectly before you can test anything. You’re never sure whether
your application is failing because of a database issue, because there’s a
missing environment variable, or because the URL of the message queue
has a typo.
Here’s another big advantage to this approach. I tend to spin up a cheap
server at my cloud provider, point a whimsical DNS name at it, and then
deploy my app to it, often many times a day. This tells me that I’m able to
do the deployment. But just as importantly, it means the people I’m writing
the software for can play with the latest changes any time they want to. If I
have a question, I can ask them to visit a particular place in the app and
show them what I’m talking about.
Single Command Deployment Is Not Just Pushing the App
I’m sure you’ve come across something like this:
Deploy your Whizzo app with a single command! All you need is a
one-time setup of your server, and then you’re good to go.
To set up the server:
1. Provision a new Unix system.
2. Run apt get update then apt get install package1 package2 ... package39.
3. Create an application user and group.
4. Create a deploy directory and set ownership to that user.
5. Edit /etc/xxx….
…
…
1. Remove the temporary files created in step 35.
2. Edit the local file whizzo.yml to point to your new server.
Now, just type whizzo deploy. That single command will get your app up
and running. Amazing, eh?
All fine and dandy if all you need to do is deploy new versions of the app.
What happens if you need to deploy five new servers in an emergency?
Sometimes the answer to this is to use a managed application hosting
environment, where all the setup steps have been done for you, and you just
provide the application. Sometimes the answer is to deploy using containers
or possibly use WASM. I personally like to use Ansible to handle both the
server and the application setup and update.
Whatever mechanism you use, there’s just one golden rule. Once you have
a fresh target system powered on and provisioned with an SSH key, you
should be able to configure the operating system, load your dependencies,
get all the services running, deploy your application, configure it, migrate
any data, and set it all running. And you should be able to do it with a single
deployment command.
Idea 30 Bare machine to running app with a single
command
Ideally, that command will be composed of a number of subcommands so
that you can skip initial environment setup on an already set-up machine.
Don’t Leave It to Chance
I always try to get this single-command deployment working on day 0. That
means that as my application grows, and as it starts to use new resources, I
can update the provisioning scripts alongside the application’s code.
About once a week during development I’ll reset my remote machine back
to its bare state—an OS and an SSH key—and make sure I can still get the
app running using the deployment command.
One day, at three in the morning and with all the sirens blaring, you’ll be
grateful you did.
Try it out
When you get a spare hour or two, create a “Hello, World!” app using the language and framework
of your choice. Then create an automation that will deploy and run that app, starting with a fresh
checkout and a newly minted target environment and ending up with your app deployed and
running.
Make a change to the app and then update it on the target machine.
If you don’t have time...
If you’re on a team that doesn’t have a single-step deployment strategy, find a time to talk with the
project lead (or whoever), and see if they’ll give you a day to try to get something set up.
Practice 12 Own Your Editor
I probably spend more time in my editor than I do in all the rest of the apps
combined. It’s where I code, where I write, where I take notes, and where I
just tinker around.
I was an Emacs user for about 20 years. I loved its extensibility and liked
the idea that it ran in a terminal, so I could use it anywhere, including over
low-bandwidth remote connections. After a while I realized I was spending
more time fiddling with my Emacs setup than I was getting work done.
For a while I used TextMate and then VS Code. Now I’ve gone back to the
terminal, but this time with Vim (Neovim, to be accurate).
Cultivate Your Editor
Your editor is as personal to you as your own thoughts, adapting to your
style, preferences, and workflow in ways that make it feel uniquely yours—
at least it should be. I’m not going to intrude on that relationship by giving
advice; I’m just going to describe some of the stuff I do.
Idea 31 The shortest path from your brain to your code
is your editor
In the old days, I was a little out of control when it came to editing. I had
thousands of lines of Emacs lisp that I’d written and probably tens of
thousands of lines of extensions I’d downloaded. For a while I handled all
my email, and read my newsgroups, directly in Emacs. But just because it’s
possible doesn’t mean it’s a good idea.
Over the years, I’ve trimmed down my editor setup as I’ve learned what I
actually need and use. Switching to Vim was a great opportunity to work on
this. I started with a totally vanilla installation of Neovim (via asdf) and
then used it for a couple of days. At the end of that time, I had a list of
things I wanted to do but couldn’t. I spent 30 minutes researching and
discovered that about 70 percent of these things were built into Vim
already; I just didn’t know how to access them. The rest were made possible
by installing extensions. I added them one at a time, only adding the next
after I’d learned the keystrokes I needed to be effective with the one I’d just
installed.
As a Vim newbie, I watched a bunch of videos and read a lot of articles.
Sometimes I’d come across something cool that I just had to install. I tried
to have the discipline to uninstall it after I grew tired of the novelty.
I’ve been using Neovim for perhaps three years now. Here are the types of
extensions I’ve settled on:
A package manager
Couple of nice dark themes
LSP and Treesitter support for the languages I use
Copilot support (normally disabled)
An updated status line, including LSP and Git status information
An extension that lets me align fields across a number of lines
Multiple cursor support
Something to show block nesting
Support for navigation based on document syntax (uses Treesitter)
Markdown preview
This short list covers pretty much everything I need.
Hate Those Meeses to Pieces
I also set myself the goal of not using a mouse while editing. I started by
working out keyboard commands that helped me move around a buffer
quickly, as this was my primary use of the mouse. While I’m still learning
new tricks, I’m already way faster and more accurate than I was with a
mouse, and my hands never leave the keyboard.
The next challenge was selecting text: making a selection with the mouse
seemed so natural. But then I discovered Vim’s text-objects. These allow
you to apply a command to some semantic element in your file. If I just
entered a function, and I’d like to format it, I just enter v i f = (which
means visually select inside the current function and = (reformat….)). If I
want to rewrap the lines in this paragraph, it’s v a p g q (ap is all this
paragraph and gq is [inexplicably] rewrap).
My last mouse dependency was selecting things such as file names from
long lists. Fortunately Vim has a great fuzzy finder extension, so I just type
A/Ed to open Automate/Editor.md.
And now I can say I’m mouse-free while editing. Interestingly, my right
wrist no longer hurts at the end of the day.
Challenge
In your current editor, work out how to do the following:
Reformat the body of an if statement, the current function, and the whole file.
Set the column where text wraps to 75 and then rewrap your comments.
Move the cursor to the start or end of the current function.
Move the cursor to the opening brace corresponding to the closing brace it’s on.
Replace the single quotes around a string with double quotes.
Return a count of the number of words in a Markdown document.
Challenge
Can you use your current editor without a mouse?
Explore
Just for kicks, try a different editor for any personal projects. Are there any ways it’s better than your
normal editor? Any ways it’s worse?
Practice 13 Automate Setting Up Your Development
Machine
Last week we had a thunderstorm, and some lightning struck our yard. It
blew a few circuit breakers, but everything seemed to be OK…until I hit
space and my Mac Mini didn’t wake up. It turned out that although the
power side was protected by my UPS, I have a long, unshielded Ethernet
cable, and that must have picked up enough induced voltage to fry both the
computer and the switch at the other end.
I took the computer to get it fixed, then dug out my laptop, which I haven’t
used for a while. I got it synced back to the state of the Mac Mini in about
five minutes, including the new Vim configuration files, the changes I’d
made to my terminal preferences, and all the repositories I’d been working
on.
When I got the repaired computer back, it had been totally wiped. It took 40
minutes to go through the OS setup and about 20 minutes to install the base
software I needed to create my environment. After that, I recovered my
configuration and development files in a minute or two.
Idea 32
Provision your development machine like it’s a
production server
This recovery has two components: working files and configuration.
Working files are the easy part: just make sure they’re under version
control, and commit and push changes whenever you get to a point where
you’d feel stupid if you lost the work you just did. I’d guess that 80 percent
of my commit history is labeled “stash.”
Recovering Tools and Configuration
Reinstalling the tools you use, along with their configurations, can be
trickier.
One way to think about this is to treat your computer as being just another
machine you deploy to—you are deploying your development environment,
and not your app.
I know some developers who create their development environments in
Docker containers. These contain the tools they need along with the
configuration. They then keep the actual project files in the host file system
under version control. They save either the image or the Docker/Docker
Compose scripts under version control. Provisioning a new laptop involves
installing Docker or Podman, spinning up the containers, and then checking
out the project files.
Hardcore developers use Nix to create and then re-create their
environments. The benefit to this is that if you use Nix to install tools, it
will already know what your environment should look like, so duplicating it
on another machine should be easy.
I’m more primitive than these developers. I could definitely use Docker, but
I don’t. I could try to use Nix, but I was put off when I first spent a week
trying to set it up a couple of years ago and just couldn’t bend it to my will.
Instead, I use two tools to handle the applications and tools I install and one
other app to handle my configuration.
Reinstalling Tools
The two application installers are asdf and Homebrew. asdf is mostly
focused on tools directly associated with development, compilers, tools, and
some editors. I like it because it makes it easy to run multiple versions of
these tools on different projects without resorting to language-specific
systems, such as Ruby’s rbenv.
For the stuff that’s not in asdf, I use Homebrew. It has great coverage, and
application descriptions are actively maintained. It’s not as good as asdf
when it comes to project-local environments, though. (It can also be a little
slow…)
Recovering Configuration
I have configuration files spread all over my file system. Some are in XDG
directories, such as .config and .local. Others are in my home directory or in
random places dictated by some app. I need to be able to save all of these
under version control. Later, if I mess something up (or get a new machine),
I need to be able to recover them, either singly or as a group.
A number of tools do this. Some people swear by GNU Stow, but I
personally like yadm (Yet Another Dotfile Manager). This is a very thin
wrapper around the Git command. It puts your whole hard drive under Git
but then uses Git’s sparse checkout facility so that it only manages the files
you tell it to. You add files using yadm add, commit with yadm commit, push
to GitHub or GitLab with yadm push, and restore to a new machine with
yadm clone. It really is just Git for any file you nominate on your system.
And, like Git, once you’ve added a file, it will track changes, so yadm status
will tell you the files you’ve changed.
Remember to Track Your Tools
When talking about Homebrew and asdf, I skipped something important:
how do I know which tools to install and what versions to use?
Idea 33 Track the tools you use as you install them
Fortunately both Homebrew and asdf have a way of recording their current
configuration.
For Homebrew, I run brew bundle dump in my home directory; this creates a
Brewfile. I can reinstall my current Homebrew setup by running brew bundle
in that same directory.
asdf allows you to set both global and directly local dependencies. Things I
use everywhere (such as the latest Ruby and Python) I set as global
defaults. If I need a different Ruby in a particular project, I set it as a local
default. These defaults are stored in files named .tool-versions. The global
one is in my home directory, and the local ones are in each project’s top-
level directory. In any directory, you can type asdf install to install both the
global and local tools.
I then add the files Brewfile and .tool-versions in my home directory to yadm.
When I install on a fresh box, I just go to my home directory and type brew
bundle and then asdf install.
Dumping the Homebrew configuration and updating yadm is managed by a
cronjob that runs twice a day. The asdf side takes care of itself.
Cleaning House
To be honest, I wasn’t too disappointed when my computer died. It’s
actually nice to be able to start afresh. Over time, my drive ends up full of
random stuff that has become orphaned. With the new machine, I can load
things back on as I need them. And, somehow, the tidier machine feels a
little faster and a little less glitchy.
Thought
You start work this morning only to discover your computer has melted. Ignoring the somewhat
worrying question of “what happened?” you’re faced with getting productive on a new machine.
How long does it take you to get back to the state you were in at the end of the previous day?
Explore
Do you know where the various configuration files are on your machine?
Try it
If you have a laptop and a desktop, try installing something like yadm or stow on both. Initially
create some dummy files on one of the machines; put them in different directories. Add them to
yadm, commit, and push to a shared repo. On the other machine, clone that repo and verify the files
you created have been installed in the correct places. Change the contents on one or more of them,
check the status, and then commit them. Back on the first machine pull down the changes.
Really try it
The next time you install an application that has configuration (an editor, perhaps), use a tool such as
Homebrew, asdf, or Chocolatey. Then set up the app’s initial configuration. Now save away all the
information you’d need to reinstall and configure that app.
Then on the second machine, fetch the package manager list and configuration. Run the package
manager to install the app and start it. You should see it using the same configuration you set up on
the first machine.
Footnotes
[3]
https://articles.pragdave.me/p/why-you-need-a-daybook
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
We don’t stop playing because we grow
old; we grow old because we stop
playing.
George Bernard Shaw
Chapter 5
“Embrace Change”
Let’s change tack; rather than developing code, let’s look at developing
ourselves.
How can we build our knowledge, skills, and career? How can we prepare
for a future when that future is at best murky and uncertain?
When talking about software development, I recommended taking small
steps—when we’re not sure where we’re going, a small step means we’re
less likely to fall off a cliff.
But that assumes we don’t know what lies ahead. What if we could send out
scouting parties? Like explorers mapping unknown terrain, they could
scatter in different directions and return with valuable intelligence about
what lies ahead. In software development, we call these scouting parties
prototypes; in personal development, we call them research. And both
prototypes and research make our decisions more confident and accurate.
Why?
If I was still doing what I did when I first started programming, I’d be
punching Basic programs onto paper tape. To put it another way, I’d be
unemployed.
Every developer knows this: of all the industries yet created, ours is
probably the most volatile. For us, it’s adapt and adopt—or perish. That’s
the pragmatic reason to do research.
But I strongly believe there’s another reason. We developers are magicians;
we conjure things out of our imagination—things that were previously not
possible. And we do it, by and large, for the good of everyone. And, you
know what? That’s fun!
Idea 34 Software development is managed change
I’ve spent a lot of my life doing research. My family, bless them, call it
playing. Maybe it is, and maybe that’s why I do so much of it.
Learning something because you have to is a chore, but learning because
you want to is a joy. For me, knowing that we live in a world where the
pace of change has become scary is the driver, but being able to select to
investigate things that look interesting or that glue together other things in
novel ways—this is what drives me to want to learn.
The subtitle of Kent Beck’s book Extreme Programming [Bec00] is
Embrace Change. His philosophy is that teams who know how to rock and
roll, adapting to changing environments, requirements, technologies,
whatever—these teams will be more successful and will be at an advantage
compared to their less flexible counterparts.
I don’t want to put words into his mouth, but I’m sure he would feel that the
same applies to people. In a world where the change curve appears to have
gone exponential, we all have to find ways of coping. We need to find ways
of tamping down the mild panic brought on by the feeling of drowning in
the tsunami of the new. We all need to embrace change.
How can we do that? I think the answer, again, is to simplify the process.
Structure it, and permit yourself to have fun with the new while continuing
to use the tried and tested stuff in your work.
Here’s what works for me.
Practice 14 Mix the Practical and the Fanciful
I get an immense amount of pleasure from seeing my software used.
But to experience that, I have to make sure that I have the skills I need to
deliver in an increasingly sophisticated and demanding market.
This means I have two goals when I research. First, I need to find out about
the technologies and techniques that are going to be useful to me. That’s the
practical part. Second, I need to understand which areas of development are
the most rewarding for me personally. That’s more fanciful.
Ponder...
What areas of technology would be helpful in developing your career?
And what areas of technology look interesting, outside a work context?
Here’s how I’d answer those questions in 2025.
On the practical side, I need to know more about headless CMS systems,
front-end frameworks, and edge services, as I’m planning for an upgrade to
our site. I’m also looking at techniques for minimal downtime database
migration and for less complex deployment options. Finally, I’m catching
up on the latest developments in Rails and Phoenix.
Idea 35 Research is what grownups call play
On the more fanciful side, here’s what I’m playing with:
Microcontrollers. ESP32 and the like, along with the cool sensors and
displays now available.
Practical functional programming. I keep looking for a pure functional
language that I can love.
Algebraic effects. These are a way of isolating side effects in
functional languages. They exist to solve the same problem that
monads solve, but in (I feel) a much tidier way.
The Unison language. A functional language (with algebraic effects)
that also has the idea of immutable code. Immutable code means no
more package management, and you can deploy your app by sending a
512-bit checksum to a server.
Research Is a Valid Activity
It’s easy to think that research is something you do in your spare time.
When I fall into that trap, two things happen. First, I never have spare time,
and as a result I never really play, because I feel guilty.
Idea 36 All work and no play makes Dave a grumpy boy
After a period of not playing, though, the pressure builds until I just have to
do some research. By then, the list of things I want to look at has grown to
the point where I find myself skipping around between them, never really
getting deep enough to earn a real return.
So set aside time for research. It might be 20 minutes a day, or three hours
one evening—whatever fits with your life and the way you learn. For me, I
like to do it either in the mornings, for 30 minutes after I’ve handled email,
or at night; I do a fair amount of reading in bed…
To make it effective, I jot down my goal for each session. This can be as
simple as “Write a distributed Unison program” or “How does server-side
rendering affect deployment?” or “What’s José Valim up to?”
Then I set about trying to meet that goal. Because it’s too easy to skim
through stuff and get distracted, I keep my daybook open and jot down
notes. If I come across some other area that looks interesting, I write it
down and circle it; I’ll come back to it in a future session, but I won’t derail
this session’s objectives.
I Allow Myself Some Playtime
Although I try to focus my research on practical things, I also give myself
time to do things just for the hell of it. Sometimes it’s just reading, but more
often it involves code. I’m forever writing little explorations of ideas, just to
see how they come out. I also like messing around with hardware: my
favorite of these projects was the conversion of a Fisher Price Classic Pull-
A-Tune Xylophone into a touch-sensitive midi controller, courtesy of a
Raspberry Pi. Somewhere in my office there’s a Teddy Ruxpin bear that’s
been beefed up with servos that respond to the sounds from digital
recordings. Along the way, I learned a lot about sound processing, low-level
networking, and how not to manipulate plastic.
Idea 37 Use it or lose it
Once I’ve learned something, and if it’s appropriate, I try to find a way to
knock up a quick prototype, just to double-check I actually understood it.
It’ll be ugly code, but that doesn’t matter, because I’ll delete it when I’m
done. Again, I’ll jot down notes in my daybook about the things I learned
along the way.
Plan your research
Try to make two lists, each three items long. The first is the list of things that you really should know
more about; the second is the list of things you’re curious about.
Set aside some regular time for research and start working through the lists. Initially, try alternating:
do a “should do” entry, then do a “fun to do” entry.
As you’re researching, add new things that catch your attention to the appropriate list.
And remember to keep notes.
Practice 15 Play in the Future, Work in the Past
Figure 1. The Roman God
Janus, who faced both the
past and the future
Maybe it’s just me, but whenever I come across something new and
interesting, I want to roll it into my next project. It’s fresh, it has some new
ideas, and I want to get experience using it for real.
I’ve learned the hard way that this is a bad idea. New technologies tend to
change quickly, and I can spend more time migrating my code between
releases than I spend coding.
New things have more bugs than old things. They may have worse
documentation, less in the way of online support, fewer extensions, a
scarcity of tutorials, and so on.
More insidiously, I fall prey to a new idea when it solves some particular
problem I’m stuck on. The bright shiny new thing may well solve that
problem. But often it fails to solve other problems that my old software
handled well, so I’m left trying to glue the old and the new into a kind of
Frankenproject.
It took me a long time to get control of my magpie tendencies—to stop
collecting shiny trinkets and instead to plod along with my old, familiar
(and working) tools. When it comes to the tools and libraries you rely on
every day, boring trumps exciting every time.
This is where dedicating time to research pays off. I know that I’ll be able
to play with all these new things during that time, which makes working
with the familiar the rest of the time easier to bear. Here’s where the
daybook comes in handy. When I find myself wondering if maybe, just
maybe, it would be OK to use Rails 29.32-beta on my new project, because
the rewrite in PHP looks interesting, I instead just write a note in my
daybook and continue along the path more traveled. I know that, if I’m still
interested, I’ll be able to play with Rails in an upcoming research session.
Research Dave is an advance scout, finding out what lies ahead for his alter-
ego, Production Dave.
Think back...
Consider your past projects. Have they ever been made more difficult because you or your team
chose to use bleeding-edge libraries, frameworks, or tools?
In the end, did these things live up to their promise? Did they make a difference to the value that you
delivered that was worth the extra stress?
Pair research
If other people on your team also keep lists of things to research, why not compare notes? If two (or
more) of you want to look into (say) OCAML, you could join forces and turn it into a social thing as
well as a tech thing. My bet is that you’ll learn more per unit time.
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Part 3
Simplify Your Interactions
Chapter 6
Soft Skills
Writing this chapter is a bit of a penance for me; of all the things in this
book, these are the areas I personally need to work on the most.
To some people, these things come naturally. If you’re one of these people,
you may find some of the ideas here a little obvious (but you’re probably
too nice to mention it). But if, like me, you know you can do better, perhaps
my experiences will help.
Why You Should Care
In the old days, a single super-programmer could design and code an entire
project, keeping most of the details in their head.
Those days are (for the most part) long in the past. Today, software is
written by teams. And teams are formed of people, and people are
influenced by opinions, emotions, and fear. Working in a team can be
incredibly rewarding. It can also be a minefield, when one false step can
ruin your day.
What Does This Have to Do with Simplicity?
Friction is wasted effort. In a gearbox, that waste becomes heat. In a team, it
is frustration and wasted time. Without trust and clear communication,
things that should be simple to express become way more complicated, and
misunderstandings are rife. It’s hard to make things simple when you can’t
trust they are correctly understood.
So let’s look at some ways we can navigate through the minefield, taking
more confident and less stressful steps.
Practice 16 Disagreements Are Not Zero-Sum Games
One of the problems of our times is that people are convinced that the only
way they can win is for someone else to lose. Couple that with the fact that
many people care more about winning than about the actual longer-term
outcome, and you end up with a dysfunctional and noisy world.
A simple difference of opinion can end up as a confrontation. Some people
like that, and others walk away. Neither side actually wins in that situation.
Idea 38 No one wins a zero-sum argument
An alternative approach is to realize that things are rarely black and white.
No one is likely to be 100 percent right about anything. The trick is to
accept this and to make what would otherwise have been an argument into
something more like an exploration.
This approach is called dialectical reasoning. It assumes there are elements
of truth in both sides of an opinion, and it emphasizes the benefits of trying
to synthesize something new and bigger from them. Just as important, it
turns something that threatened to be a confrontation into an interesting
discussion.
Practice dialectical thinking
Here’s the exercise. The next time you find yourself disagreeing with someone, try not to flip the
bozo bit and assume they’re an idiot. Rather than trying to show them they are wrong, instead
genuinely try to work out if maybe you are. Be actively interested in what led them to their position,
not because you’re hoping to trip them up, but rather because it might give you insights. Your
mission is not to prove you’re correct or that the other person is wrong. Instead, you are trying to
find out which parts of each of your positions have merit and from that synthesize a new
understanding that’s better than the two original ones.
This is tricky; it’s easy to come across as condescending or maybe sly. You might start by saying, “I
hear what you are saying, but I need to understand more about Xyz because it doesn’t quite line up
with my experience. Could you show me what led to your belief.”
Never disagree; you’re not trying to win. The exercise is to see things from their point of view. A
nice side effect might be that you end up learning something.
Arguing with knives
Here’s a fun exercise that helps you practice seeing things from both sides. Next time you’re at a
lunch or dinner where half the people advocate one thing and the other half advocate the opposite,
suggest the following game.
Everyone who agrees with the position should place their knives (or spoons, or pens, or…) pointing
into the center of the table (the way a knife is normally set). Those who disagree should place their
knives at 90º to this, parallel to the edge of the table.
Let the debate run for a few minutes. Then pick a pair of people who disagree and flip their knives
around; the person who previously advocated for the position must now argue against it, and the
person who previously refuted it must now do their best to sell it to everyone else.
Keep swapping a pair of knives every few minutes. Try to give everyone a chance to cycle through
both sides of the issue more than once.
It becomes a game: how can you marshal what you know to support something you disagree with.
It’s like high school debate.
You’re not trying to find winners or losers, or even to find a consensus. It’s just an interesting way to
spend 30 minutes with friends.
But on the way home, you might just find yourself reevaluating some of your strongly held views.
Idea 39 Absolute is the enemy of simple
You might be wondering what this has to do with simplicity.
Think of someone you know who 100 percent believes in something. How
much energy do they have to put in to sustain that belief in the face of
evidence to the contrary? How much time do they waste making decisions
on the basis of things that are only partially true.
A team run on absolutes is never going to be efficient. They’ll find it much
harder to change when the world changes. And they’ll be missing out on the
better ideas that come from synthesizing varieties of viewpoints.
Practice 17 Work On Your Empathy
If you work on just one soft skill, work on empathy.
Let’s start with a definition: empathy is the ability to understand how
another person feels and to take that into account when dealing with them.
It doesn’t mean you have to agree with them—just that you have to
consider and respect them and their positions.
Empathy acts as a social lubricant, allowing people to reach mutually
satisfactory decisions. As soon as two or more people work together, they
need to find a way to share what they know, what they believe, and what
they plan. The more efficiently and effectively they can do this, things
become simpler, and work becomes more agile.
Think of the long-term couples you know. Watch them communicate and
resolve problems with nothing more than some gestures and the occasional
eye contact.
Now think about talking with a customer about a new project. If you try to
see their problems through their eyes as well as your own, you’ll be in a far
better position to produce technical solutions that deliver what that
customer actually needs and not just what they say they want. You’ll also be
able to explain that solution in terms they understand.
When you have empathy with others, you can short-circuit a lot of trial and
error. You can take smaller steps because you know they’ll trust you. If you
mess up, you know that others will understand your frustration and regret
rather than blame you. You feel freer to experiment when you have that
emotional safety net.
Another way of thinking about the link between empathy and simplicity is
to consider what happens when there’s no empathy. People look out for
themselves and protect their own ideas and plans against dilution from other
people’s input. Work becomes siloed, and decisions tend to become
absolute. Organizations will tend to become more hierarchical because that
makes it easier to preserve authority. The reaction to setbacks is not
learning—it’s blame. Perhaps this sounds familiar?
Although empathy is all about groups of people, it is up to each individual
to find their own path to expressing and using it. Then it’s about the team
accepting and amplifying each person’s interactions.
If the scale goes from 10 being totally empathetic to 0 being Ted Bundy,
I’m probably a 4. But since doing the research for this book, I’ve realized
that’s not good enough, so I’m venturing out of my comfort zone and
working on developing empathy.
Here are some of the things I’m trying or plan to try.
Give People Time
In some ways, time is our most limited resource. We live with constant time
pressure and feel guilty if we’re not being productive.
This is one of my biggest problems when dealing with people. I view my
work interactions as transactional—some kind of information exchange. I
try to get them done efficiently, then move on.
That is wrong. Each time I do this I erode my connection with the other
person; I treat them as a resource and not a human being.
So my personal exercise, which I recommend to you if you’re like me, is to
make the transaction secondary to the overall interaction. Make time for the
person and not just for the information. Try not to look like you want to
rush off to put out the next fire—enjoy being with another human for a few
minutes.
One thing I’ve noticed as I try to get better at this: it seems to be a lot easier
to practice with people you don’t know. Another trick is to have some
generic questions you can use to get them chatting. They call it small talk,
but it’s really the glue that binds tribes together. All it takes is taking the
time to listen.
Idea 40 Small talk is about listening, not talking
What we’re learning here is to see things from other people’s points of
view. Being able to chat comfortably with someone means you care enough
to remember things about them and their life.
How Do I Look to Others?
I’m English. I was raised to wear my heart in a hermetically sealed Kevlar-
lined box that I keep in a floor safe under the bed.
It doesn’t matter whether I’m upset, frustrated, bored, concentrating,
pleased—however I’m feeling, I’m always surprised that people don’t seem
to notice. I don’t tell people I have a bad toothache; I expect them to work it
out. Then I’m disappointed when my clipped answers to their questions
annoy them.
If you believe that how you feel is obvious, then are you ever surprised
when people don’t correctly assess your mood? If you feel that maybe it
isn’t so obvious, are you sometimes hurt that people just don’t get how
you’re feeling?
Either way, what could we do to make it easier for people to know what
we’re feeling without also going off the deep end?
Personally, I’m trying to tell people if I’m feeling something strongly. I try
not to make it sound like it’s all about me, but when I realize that I’ve been
curt with someone, I might add on “I’m sorry. That probably sounded terse.
I’ve got a bad tooth, and I’m finding it hard to concentrate.”
Idea 41 Don’t assume people know how you feel; tell
them
If people misinterpret how you’re feeling, then it’s a safe bet you’ve done
the same to them on occasion. So how can you find out how they really
feel?
Try this
People get very tired of someone who’s constantly asking if they feel upset. But there are other ways
of asking that actually make people feel good:
“Hi, Jan! What’re you up to?”
“I’ve just spent the morning tracking down a bug in the report formatter.”
“Ouch! That kind of thing can be really frustrating.”
“Actually, I quite enjoy it.”
“Really? Why’s that…“
Make a game of it: periodically try to assess someone’s mood by just observing them and then try to
find a way of asking them without directly asking the question.
Do I Have Power?
Sometimes, with all the daily frustrations, it’s easy to forget that we
developers have a surprising amount of power. We make things happen. We
understand both the real world and the abstract world of schemas and
architectures. Quite often, we know more about the overall business than
just about anyone else in the company.
This often places us on the privileged side of an interaction. We have the
option to lord it over the other person, to wield our arcane knowledge to
make ourselves feel special and powerful. We can score points.
And, unfortunately, we often get away with it, because the rest of the world
just shrugs and thinks “programmers, eh? Sad…”
Try this
If you find yourself in a situation where you are scoring points by showing off your godlike
knowledge of something, change the rules. The new game is that you score whenever you get the
other person to understand a point you’re making well enough that they paraphrase it back to you.
It Works Up the Chain, Too…
One of the strange aspects of the software business is that developers
actually have a lot of power over their managers. This is one cause of
friction: the managers may (tacitly) feel the need to exert control to stop
their charges from getting out of hand.
So practice empathy when talking with them. Take away the feeling that
you’re some kind of threat and make them feel better about themselves by
the end of every conversation.
Practice the Golden Rule
John Stuart Mill phrased it, “to do as you would be done by.” Treat others
the way you’d hope they would treat you. Being nice is a positive-sum
game.
The common interpretation of this is “don’t be a jerk.” But there’s another,
far more positive aspect.
Try this
As an exercise, spend a month proactively doing nice, unsolicited things for people. Nothing
dramatic, but things that show that you’ve thought about what someone else would want. Fetch your
desk neighbor a cup of coffee when you refill yours. Make a point of telling a colleague how good
their latest PR looked. Offer to finish off running the tests for them if a teammate needs to leave a
little early to pick up their kid.
This exercise has two benefits. First, it makes you think about other people and what they might
need. That’s empathy right there.
The other benefit is that things will feel nicer. You’ll feel good being nice to folks, and they’ll feel
appreciated.
Empathy Is Anticipated Feedback
I believe that empathy has a core role to play in making things simple.
Empathy is a way of gathering essential feedback on ourselves; we imagine
a situation from someone else’s viewpoint and use that to adjust our
behavior.
This lets us move a lot faster and with less friction. We could just do
something mindlessly and then handle the reaction. But if we misjudged the
situation, we’d have all that work to undo, and all that trust to rebuild. It’s
not very efficient.
But two or more people who have empathy can bypass a lot of that: they
can respond to nonverbal cues and to anticipated needs to make lots of
smaller decisions and to try them out both implicitly and explicitly.
Working with empathy means getting pretty much instantaneous feedback
and making continuous minute corrections. And that makes things a lot
simpler.
How well do you know each other?
The Johari Window is an exercise to help you discover how your view of yourself agrees with other
people’s view of you. As well as providing often surprising differences between your opinion of
yourself and that of others, the exercise also helps you explore things that you might want to open up
about as a way of building trust. You can find plenty of information online.[4] If you want to try it,
I’d recommend having someone who’s not participating run the session, just to keep things on an
even keel.
Practice 18 Have Empathy for Things
Everyone has a relative who has a might-makes-right approach to the
physical world. If a key doesn’t turn in a lock, turn it harder until it breaks
off. If the car won’t start, run the battery flat trying to force it to. If the jar
won’t open, bend the tip of your favorite knife trying to pry it. (Do I sound
a little bitter? I liked that knife…)
These people seem to lack the ability (or will) to think of themselves as part
of a system, where the physical thing they’re working on has its own
constraints and preferred way of doing things. They don’t think, “Could this
be the wrong key? Maybe it’s upside down?” or “Why doesn’t the car start?
What am I forgetting?” or “What other way do jars open? Should I try
twisting the top?”
Idea 42 Understand your environment; don’t fight it
Empathy for people means experiencing things from their perspective,
understanding how they work, what they can do, and what their limits are.
Physical things lack an inner perspective, but they do have ways of
working, things they can do, and limits.
Knowing and acting on this is a form of empathy and, just as with social
empathy, learning to use it makes things easier and simpler.
A long time ago I had a share of a sailboat. My co-owner and I did alright,
but we knew we’d benefit from some training, so we had an experienced
skipper sail with us for a weekend. It was humbling. When we sailed, we
steered by forcing the helm back and forth. We trimmed sails by loosening
or tightening sheets a foot at a time. Sailing was tiring. When our
experienced skipper sailed, he barely moved. He had his fingers resting on
the helm, and steered by gently curling and uncurling them, often
imperceptibly. He’d trim the sails once, and then adjust the sheets as
needed, and by inches.
He didn’t fight the boat, trying to bend it to his will. Instead, he felt the boat
and came to an agreement with it. He had empathy, used less energy, and
the boat ran faster and more smoothly. He made sailing simple.
Listen to Your Code
This is what it’s like when you start listening to your code. You’ll find
yourself making small adjustments without really being aware of it. Simple.
But just how do you listen to your code?
How often do you feel uneasy with a function as you’re writing it or look at
a screen of code and think, “Something’s wrong,” before you even
consciously read the characters? Do you ever feel your code pushing back
as you write it; you can’t stop thinking, “This is harder than it should be”?
The trick is to recognize this and to work on doing something when the
feeling surfaces.
A good place to start is when debugging. We all know people who are good
at it. Their trick is that they stop thinking of the bug as a mistake. Instead,
the bug is simply the system doing what it was told to do. They stop
looking for the code that is wrong. Instead, they look at the system as a
whole and ask, “What could make it respond like that?” They think about
the flows of data and control and wonder how they can isolate segments of
both. They’re treating the system the same way a diagnostician treats a
patient.
If you sometimes struggle when debugging, try switching perspectives.
Think about the poor code, forced by some mistake to behave badly. What
might cause it to do that? How can you ask it questions to better understand
what it’s doing? I know it sounds a little new-agey, but it works for me.
Taking it a step beyond debugging, start looking for your subconscious
giving you warnings about your work. The symptoms are often subtle:
You leave your desk to get a drink more often than usual.
You keep renaming things.
You feel like typing is hard work.
You want to stop and do something else.
And other avoidance behaviors.
I met the person who’d become my wife in New York. She had lived there
for a while; I was a visitor.
When we walked down the street, she’d sometimes hip check me toward
the street. After a while, I asked why she was doing this, and she said she
wasn’t. The next time it happened, I stopped dead and showed her I’d been
moved.
After that, we worked out that whenever she passed a passage or doorway
where someone could be hiding, she stepped away. This wasn’t conscious.
It was a reflex.
The Gift of Fear
Gavin de Becker’s company provides personal protection for people who
are targets for acts of aggression. He wrote an amazing book, The Gift of
Fear [de 97], in which he describes what those of us who can’t afford a
bodyguard can do to avoid danger.
One piece of advice has stuck with me over the years since I read it: learn to
trust your instincts. He claims that most people who are mugged on the
street report that they felt uneasy before the attack happened but just
shrugged it off.
The feeling of being uneasy is your subconscious recognizing patterns that
you might not be aware of. It might have noticed a shadow move or heard
breathing or soft footsteps. It has no way to tell your conscious brain, “Hey!
Watch out!” So instead it triggers lower-level responses: your heart rate
may increase, you might feel a little queasy or cold. And he helps his clients
learn to recognize and act on these feelings.
His point is that these reflexes helped us survive in more primitive times.
Ignoring them now means throwing away thousands of years of collective
experience, along with dozens of years of your own.
Listen to your lizard brain
The next time you feel strange, when things feel a little off, try not to shrug it off. Instead, examine
that feeling. What were you doing when it started? What is it making you feel?
Here’s a trick that might work for you. You know how people say that often they get their best ideas
in the shower or when walking? These are times when their conscious brain is idling, and this gives
their subconscious room to break through.
So when my spidey-sense fires, and I can’t immediately put my finger on the cause, I take a break.
Sometimes I walk, or start to doodle, or do some tidying. Often, the thing that triggered the incident
just pops into my head.
Perhaps that might work for you.
Practice 19 Spin a Story
Your boss’s boss steps into the elevator. “You work on the back-end stuff,
don’t you?” You nod and smile. “So maybe you can tell me: why am I
paying for four times the amount of storage than we need to hold our data?”
You think for a second: “Oh, it’s the extra space we need for all the
indexes.”
“So what’s an index, and why am I paying for it?”
Now this is a question you can answer.
An index is a mapping between the values in one or more columns in a
relationship to the row or rows that contain those values. The index is
hashed or sorted to make access fast, and once you find a value in an
index, you can get straight to the rows with those values in the given
columns.
You stop talking and smile. This was just like a job interview—you aced it.
So you’re somewhat surprised when your boss’s boss (boss²) scowls,
mutters something about gibberish, and gets off the next time the doors
open.
You gave a great, factual answer. And you communicated nothing.
Let’s rewind and replay the scene, but this time with a version of you that
has practiced the ideas in this section.
Take Two
“So what’s an index, and why am I paying for it?”
You stop to think. Your boss² is smart but not technical. You know the
answer to their question is that the indexes take up space, but how can you
explain why the indexes are needed. You need a story—an analogy.
Well, our systems need to be able to find one particular piece of
information out of the billions of things we store. To do that they
create indexes. An index is just like the index in a book: you can
search it quickly, and then it takes you right to the page you want. We
have to look up things in lots of different ways, so we have lots of
indexes. And just like the index in a book takes up space, our indexes
take up space, too.
As you’ve been weaving this tale, you’ve been watching boss²’s face.
They’ve been nodding, and their eyes never left you. At the end, they smile.
“Ah, that makes total sense. I wish your boss could explain things to me
like that.”
Fiction, Not Friction
You might be thinking that the story is not accurate. Database indexes are
way more complex than that, and they’re constantly reorganizing
themselves, something the average physical index rarely does. You made
yourself look like you don’t know even the simplest thing about database
internals.
So what?
In this situation—in most situations—your task is to convey information, to
communicate. To do that, you need to think about the circumstances:
What information is important in context?
What vocabulary will be effective communicating it?
Are there analogies or metaphors that map the information onto that
vocabulary?
Will any information that is lost or misrepresented by the analogy
affect the listener’s understanding?
Let’s apply this to the elevator conversation about indexes.
What information is important in context?
You want to explain that the total amount of storage is more than the
amount of underlying data because your applications use many
indexes.
What vocabulary will be effective communicating it?
You know that boss² won’t follow (or be interested) in hearing about
hashing and B-trees, so you want to spin a nontechnical tale.
Are there analogies or metaphors that map the information onto that
vocabulary?
You try to come up with some real-world example where data is
indexed and those indexes take up space. A book index is an obvious
analog.
Will any information that is lost or misrepresented by the analogy affect the
listener’ s understanding?
You quickly work through the idea, remembering that all you need to
explain is that indexes make access faster but take up space. Your story
gets that across, so it’s good enough.
A good analogy illustrates what you need to communicate in a language
that speaks to your listener. It won’t be the whole truth, and it may even be
inaccurate in the details.
Idea 43 Analogies are useful lies
A 100 percent accurate low-level answer will cause friction unless the
listener is as familiar as you are with all the details. A mostly accurate
analogy or metaphor trades away that friction at the risk of introducing a
little fiction.
Choosing a Domain
One of the hardest parts of this kind of storytelling is choosing the domain
—the world where your story lives. It’s difficult because it has to be rich
enough to convey your message, but at the same time it must be easily
understood by both you and your listener.
For this reason, you should probably only use this technique if you and your
listener share common backgrounds.
Here are some things to avoid.
Areas where only one of you has deep knowledge
You may be a baseball fanatic, but explaining something by drawing a
parallel to the infield fly rule will fall flat unless your listener shares
your passion.
Also avoid using domains where your listener is knowledgeable and
you are not. If you know your listener is an avid opera goer, don’t try
using The Marriage of Figaro as a metaphor for key exchange
algorithms unless you also love Mozart.
Politics, religion, social issues, and the like
Duh.
Worlds that take a long time to establish
People looking for information won’t tolerate a 15-minute introduction
to the characters and mores of the analogy. You have to pick something
that requires almost no background information.
Topical personalities or social media happenings
Surprisingly not everyone follows #mycatatethemailman.
Instead, look for worlds that you share—classic movies, practical life
experiences, quirks of your office network, the weather. If you could use it
to make small talk with someone, it’s probably fair game.
This Is Empathy in Action
When we come up with stories to explain unfamiliar concepts,
what we’re really doing is seeing the situation from the other
person’s perspective. We imagine what it would feel like to
have someone answer what seems to be a simple question with
a bunch of incomprehensible jargon; it would make the
recipient feel intimidated, ignorant, frustrated, or just plain
angry.
So, instead, we use our empathy to create a way of mapping our
world into theirs.
The Essence of Analogy
Before we dig into the art of creating stories, let’s look at why analogies
work.
We’re trying to explain something that is outside our listener’s comfort
zone. The thing we’re trying to explain has a number of different
components, and those components interact in a predictable way. The
problem is that our listener doesn’t know any of this. So we come up with a
different domain, one that the listener does understand, and map each of the
components in our original description into corresponding components in
the analogy’s domain.
A good analogy contains more, though. We’re trying to illustrate how the
thing we’re describing works in the real world—how its real-world
components will interact and produce results. For the analogy to be
effective, the corresponding components in the analogy’s domain must also
interact, and that interaction must produce a result that maps back to the
real world.
In our index example, here’s what this look like:
The index enables very fast lookup of something in a book.
The database index enables very fast lookup of the location of some
data.
The indexes take space in the book.
The database indexes take storage space.
The more indexes you have, the more ways you can look something up.
The more database indexes, the more ways you can rapidly find data.
The more indexes you have, the more space they take.
The more database indexes you have, the more storage they take.
Is the mapping perfect? Not at all. Possibly the biggest inaccuracy is that
the space overhead of a book index is considerably less that the overhead of
database indexes. It also skips all the database-level stuff that indexes can
do. None of that matters, though; the analogy is accurate enough to help us
communicate our point. That’s all we need.
Creating the Analogy
Probably the simplest way to come up with an analogy is to look at the
names of the things you’re trying to explain. In the database example, we
wanted to talk about records and indexes. The word index suggested book,
and it didn’t take too much thought to go from there.
Let’s look at another example. You’re managing an application which sells
event tickets. Under peak load, you’re suffering from performance issues
caused by contention for database locks. Your (nontechnical) manager
wants to know why you can’t just add a dozen more servers to fix the
problem.
Use the checklist to help come up with an analogy.
What information is important in context?
The issue is not the ability to handle the initial incoming request.
Instead, it’s caused by every request having to queue up to write to the
database at the end of processing. We need to explain that extra
processing power outside the database won’t help.
What vocabulary will be effective communicating it?
We’re looking at a situation when incoming events can initially be
processed in parallel but that eventually have to queue to get exclusive
access to some resource. The word queue immediately triggers a rich
set of scenarios—everyone has spent time waiting in queues.
Are there analogies or metaphors that map the information onto that
vocabulary?
We could describe the process of checking in with bags at an airport.
Passengers first hand their bags over to the airline and then line up to
pass through the security checkout. The interaction where they dump
their bags is like the initial processing of a request in our system, and
waiting for their turn in the security line is equivalent to queuing for
the database.
Will any information that is lost or misrepresented by the analogy affect the
listener’ s understanding?
I think we have a good enough match to start spinning a yarn.
“I understand why you’d like to throw some more hardware at the handling
of our incoming requests. Here’s why we don’t think it will be as effective
as we want.
“Imagine our system is like a train station. Passengers arrive and buy a
ticket, just like our users. They find a free ticket machine and buy a ticket.
Those machines are like the servers that handle incoming requests. They
then have to join the line to pass through security checks. They can only do
this one at a time. That’s the same as our requests waiting to update the
database.
“Everyone complains about how long it takes to get to their train. We might
think that we should add more ticket machines, so we can handle more
arriving passengers in parallel. That won’t help, because people will still
end up waiting at security.
“Instead, we need to focus our attention on the security bottleneck. What
can we do to get people through it faster? Run more lanes in parallel? Cut
down on the number of interactions with each person? Speed up the
processing of each passenger?
“That’s why we think that our time is better spent looking at the database
bottleneck.”
I think this is a pretty good analogy: the concepts in the real world (our
application, request handling, and database contention) map well into the
analogy (train station, ticket machine, and security). Interactions in the real
world are modeled by corresponding interactions in the story, and as a result
the conclusions we can draw from the analogy apply in the real world, too.
Idea 44 Concepts in the story should interact like their
real-world counterparts
Performance Anxiety
It’s difficult to come up with good analogies on the spot. I can’t count the
number of times I’ve finished a frustrating conversation only to come up
with the ideal analogy on the trip home.
But it is possible to practice, and with practice comes the ability to think on
your feet. Here are three ideas:
Practice offline storytelling
You don’t have to be face-to-face with someone to use stories. In fact, it’s a lot easier to do it
asynchronously.
Email is a great way of practicing your technique without the stress of having to respond
immediately.
When questions arrive in your inbox, pause before you answer, and ask yourself what the sender
actually needs and how you could best explain it. Maybe use the checklist as an aide-mémoire.
Write your response using an analogy and then add something like “I’m not sure if I explained that
clearly. Did it make sense?” Feedback in all things…
Practice social storytelling
We’ve all been in this situation: your aunt comes over and asks you (again) just what is it you do. Or
your uncle wants to know “what the hell is an SSID?”
You’ll never have a friendlier audience to practice on. You can even tell them, “I’m working on
finding new ways to explain things. Do you mind being a guinea pig?” And then give it your best
shot. Ask them if you’re making sense as you go along.
Of course the downside of this is that you’ll become the go-to source for every technical question in
your family.
Take an improv class
I’ve been to a couple of conferences that offered the opportunity of spending an afternoon with
improv comedians, learning and practicing some of their techniques. It was interesting to see how
some attendees blossomed as the afternoon progressed (I was not one of them). But even the worst
of us learned useful techniques (“yes, and…”) for buying some thinking time while keeping a
conversation going.
Tell Yourself Stories, Too
I often find myself trying to write some software when I don’t fully
understand what I need to do. Normally I’d write throwaway prototypes to
explore various solutions. But I’ve also found it useful to spend a few
minutes trying to come up with an analogy for the problem I’m trying to
solve. Once I’m thinking in the domain of the story, I might see how those
fictional objects might interact to achieve their (fictional) outcome.
Sometimes I can then map that action back into my problem domain.
Ask yourself
Come up with some analogies to help answer the following technical questions for one of your
friends who isn’t that technical.
1. How does a stack (or a LIFO queue) work?
2. How does a FIFO queue work?
3. Just what is an SSID?
4. What’s the difference between a computer’s memory and storage?
Footnotes
[4]
https://www.mindtools.com/au7v71d/the-johari-window
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Part 4
Simplify Your Code
This part is something of an anomaly. The other parts are
fairly high level, but here I dive down into the code.
It’ s also strange because its two chapters are very different.
The first is an exploration of using data to drive the
operation of code rather than have code simply process
data. The chapter is there not because it’ s the only way of
simplifying code, but because as a technique it is easy to
implement, it delivers a lot of benefit, and it isn’t widely
used.
The second chapter in this part is even stranger: it’ s a
collection of one- or two-page very low-level practices that I
use daily when coding.
A lot of debate surrounded whether to include this part. The
last thing I want to do is tell you how to code. In the end it’ s
included because I think it illustrates a way of thinking
about the mechanics of coding—looking for simplifications
whenever you bump into something that gets in your way.
Chapter 7
Data Driven
I used to think my job as a programmer was to write code that manipulated
data—inputs became outputs, data became information. My programs were
structured fairly imperatively, even when writing in OO or functional
languages, because my implicit assumption was that the code was in charge.
I was wrong, of course. The code is not in charge—it’s simply one tool we
use to deliver value.
I now have a different view of development, and one that makes my code
simpler. The effective approach to programming is to have data and code
hand control back and forth. Sometimes code generates data; sometimes
data drives the code.
The benefit of this is clear: data is easier to work with than code. It’s easier
to reason about, easier to manipulate, and easier to change. The more you
drive your code with data, the more your code inherits these attributes, too.
Idea 45 Data is simpler than code
Every application is already driven by the data it receives as input; those
values affect conditional code and loops. But here I’m talking about a
deeper layer of data—data that is part of the logic of the application.
This can be done in many, many ways. In this chapter I look at two: using
tables to sequence the execution of code and then taking the idea further
with state machines.
These concepts are just the tip of the iceberg. An application’s configuration
is also data that controls its behavior. The way we supply and update that
data can either simplify our apps or make them more complicated.
Data in transit between parts of an application can also drive what happens
next.
We can take it further, using data structures to control what and when code
gets executed. This is a great way of simplifying tests.
For real control, we can turn to state machines; they’re not as complicated
as people make them out to be, and they’re a great way of turning deeply
nested code into nice linear chunks.
You’ll be amazed just how much simpler your code can become by making
parts of it data driven.
Practice 20 Let the Data Do the Driving
Replacing code with data is probably at the top of the list of things that give
me that self-satisfied feel-good feeling when I code.
I love taking code that is either repetitive or close to being repetitive and
shrinking it all down to a single function that can be parameterized by data.
Why? Because…
Idea 46 Data is easier to change than code
Maybe I’m creating a bunch of shapes for a drawing program:
shape = add
_
shape(Triangle, sides: 3)
shapes
_
by_
sides[3].push(shape)
shape = add
_
shape(Square, sides: 4)
shapes
_
by_
sides[4].push(shape)
shape = add
_
shape(Rhombus, sides: 4)
shapes
_
by_
sides[4].push(shape)
: :
I’d most likely write the code this way when I start with the first shape and
stick with this structure when I add the second. But by the third, I’m
thinking that I need to separate the data that changes from the code that
doesn’t.
[
[ Triangle, 3 ],
[ Square, 4 ],
[ Rhombus, 4 ],
:
].forEach(([ cls, sides ]) => {
let shape = add
_
shape(cls, sides: sides)
shapes
_
by_
sides[sides].push(shape)
})
I know—this code is slightly longer than the original, but despite that I
think it’s simpler for two related reasons:
1. It makes the list of shapes explicit so that it’s easier to scan and to
maintain.
2. It separates two different ideas: a list of shapes and the code that adds
each shape to our system. In the initial example code, all this was
jumbled together.
Now, adding a new shape just means adding a new line to the table.
Managing Method Chains with Error Handling
Now we need to handle geometric transformations on our shapes. Each of
the transform functions returns a tuple: [ status, new
_
shape ]. If the status is ok,
then new
_
shape will contain a new, transformed version of the shape,
otherwise an error occurred, and the new
_
shape value is invalid.
let square =
new Square(10)
let [ status, square1 ] = scale(square, 0.5)
if (status ==
"ok"
) {
let [ status, square2 ] = rotate(square1,
-5)
if (status ==
"ok"
) {
let [ status, square3 ] = skew(square2, 0.1)
if (status ==
"ok"
) {
display(square3)
}
}
We’ve all written code like this. But we can make it data driven and flatten
}
it out:
const transform = [
(shape) => scale(shape, 0.5),
(shape) => rotate(shape,
-5),
(shape) => skew(shape, 0.1),
]
let square =
new Square(10)
for ( let cmd of transform) {
[ status, shape ] = cmd(shape)
if (status !=
"ok"
) {
shape =
undefined
break
}
}
if (shape)
display(shape)
It’s harder to assert that the data-driven code is simpler in this example, but
I’m going to try. :)
First, this example is pretty trivial. In the real world, the nested code tends
to be more complex and often deeper. The benefits are clearer in these
cases.
Even in this simple case, though, the data-driven approach achieves a
number of things:
We’ve separated the specification of the sequence of transforms from
the code that does the transforming, making it easier to see what’s
going on and to change it. (Compare the ease of swapping the order of
the scale and skew transforms in each example.)
Because this transformation specification is now just a value, we can
use it in other places.
We’ve replaced the nesting with a loop. In languages that support an
interruptible reduce function, we could even replace the loop as well.
We can now test the transforms individually.
Idea 47 The data is the what and the code is the how
Data-Driven Code Is an Interpreter
I’ve said for a long time that people should write code by writing
interpreters, and I’ve become used to the “yeah, sure” look that follows. I
now realize I needed to explain it better. When I said “interpreter,” people
imagined the massive and complicated environments that execute
programming languages like Java, Ruby, Python, or Elixir. But interpreters
don’t have to be complex.
An interpreter is simply code that is told what to do by some data. In the
case of programming languages, that data may be in the form of a syntax
tree or bytecode, and the interpreter is the code that scans that data and
performs actions based on it.
Our previous example of shape drawing is an interpreter: the data is the
table of shape names and sides, and the execution part is the loop that runs
through this table, invoking the appropriate actions.
Simple interpreters such as this are a key strategy when it comes to making
things easy to change. (They also make the code easier to write in the first
place.)
Driven by External Data
All the examples so far have used literal values in the code itself to define
the data that drives the code execution. That’s not a requirement. The data
can be dynamic, perhaps generated by some other part of the code or even
generated in response to user interactions.
In our drawing app, we might let the user create a sequence of
transformations and give it a name. That sequence could then be applied to
shapes selected by the user.
Any time you find yourself with a bunch of repetitive code, see if you can
extract the variable part from the part that stays the same, and move that
variable part into a data structure.
Ponder
The transformation example used a list of functions to drive the transformation loop. That means
that the code that creates the list must be in the same scope as the functions themselves. But perhaps
the transforms list is being constructed by one application and then interpreted by another.
How would you change the code to handle this?
Practice 21 Simplify Your Tests Using Tables
A few years back I wrote an assembler and emulator for the PDP-11, the
most popular minicomputer of the 1970s. It was one of those systems where
you just had to get it right. A subtle bug in instruction decoding and
execution might not reveal itself until some code that the emulator was
executing just happened to trigger it.
One set of tests made sure that the emulator could correctly identify which
machine instruction it was about to execute. This wasn’t as easy as it sounds
—the PDP-11 instruction format was designed to fit as much information as
possible into every 16-bit word. Sometimes one word would represent an
opcode, two addressing modes, and two registers. Other times it might hold
a branch instruction with a relative offset.
I needed hundreds of instruction decode tests. Here’s one approach:
test(
`decode mov
`
, () => {
expect(emulator.decode(0o010000)).toBe(
`
`
mov
)
})
test(
`decode movb`
, () => {
expect(emulator.decode(0o110000)).toBe(
`
movb`
)
})
test(
`decode cmp
`
, () => {
expect(emulator.decode(0o020000)).toBe(
`
cmp
`
)
})
// and so on for page after page
This was a lot of repetitive copying and pasting. Even worse, all the
boilerplate makes it hard to see the actual thing we’re testing.
Table-driven code to the rescue:
([
[ 0o010000,
[ 0o110000,
`
`
mov
`
movb`
],
],
[ 0o020000,
`
`
cmp
],
// : :
[ 0o160000,
`
sub`
],
]).forEach(([instruction, op]) => {
test(
`decode ${op}
`
, () => {
expect(emulator.decode(instruction)).toBe(op)
})
})
The table contains a sequence of test cases—each row contains a binary
value representing the instruction along with the name of the corresponding
opcode.
We iterate over the table, generating a unique test for each row. We embed
the opcode name into the name of the test (to make it easier to see what’s
going on), and we verify that the decode is correct with the expect().toBe()
assertion.
Idea 48 Use tables to drive repetitive tests
Drive Multistep Tests with Data
Tables really shine when you’re building more complex tests.
For example, Shopify has a wonderful, well-documented GraphQL API. I
wanted to see if I could use it to feed order data into our royalty system.
The problem? The API can give you the current state of an order, but it
doesn’t tell you how it arrived in that state. A customer might buy
something but not pay immediately, so the API would return an order with
no payment transactions. Later, they complete the payment, so the API
would give us the same order but with one or more payment transactions
and perhaps some modified totals. Later on the customer discovers they
could have used a coupon and asks the support staff if they could apply it to
the order. Now the GQL contains three or four more records, showing
discount information, discount applications, and refund transactions.
At our end, we have to reconcile the current state of an order with the last
known state, determine what events have occurred, and then work out what
it means in terms of the allocation of the money received with each title in
the order.
Each test contained multiple steps.
1. We’d start with the first API response and verify we’d captured it
correctly.
2. Then, in the same test (because we needed the prior state), we’d fetch
the next response and check that we’d correctly interpreted the
changes.
3. Repeat step 2 perhaps four or five times.
As always, the first test I coded by hand. It tested just a single API response
and was about 135 lines long. The next test handled two responses and was
well over 200 lines of code.
But now I could see the patterns and refactor out everything apart from the
incoming data and the expected results. These values went into a table, and
that table was the test.
The test data ended up looking something like this:
[
"three items then refund one"
, [
[ ... step1 ... ],
[ ... step2 ... ],
[ ... step3 ... ],
]]
Each step was a nested table:
[
"#2288-a-start-with-one-item"
,
expect(2288, TEST
USER
FOX
_
_
_
HOLLOW, TEST
USER
FOX
_
_
_
{
HOLLOW) do
tax
_
total: BigDecimal(
shipping_
total: BigDecimal(
discount
_
total: BigDecimal(
grand
_
total: BigDecimal(
product
_
total: BigDecimal(
line
_
items: [
"2.06"
),
"0"
),
"0"
),
"27.01"
),
"24.95"
),
[
"tvmelixir-p-00"
, 1, BigDecimal(
"24.95"
) ],
royalty_
],
lines: [],
}
end
]
The first element of the list identified the fixture to load—this was a file
containing a GraphQL message. The second element was a structure
representing the expected state of the order after that message had been
processed. Orders are complex, spread across half-a-dozen tables, so I
created an expect helper that generated the boilerplate content and let me
supply just the values I cared about.
All the code I’d written for the first test was still there. I’d just factored it
out into something that would accept the fixtures and expected values from
the table. When I needed a new test, I could concentrate on the inputs and
outputs and not write any additional code. That simplicity encouraged me to
test scenarios I might have glossed over if each test was a fresh 250-line
method.
Tests Are Already Data Driven
For anything more than the most basic test, you’re likely to create data
structures representing the inputs to and the outputs from the code under
test. In a way, we can say that the test that uses this data is already data-
driven.
But if you have multiple tests that follow the same pattern—each with
different inputs and outputs—you can extract the test logic into a function
and parameterize it with a data table. Stick that data into a list and iterate
over it, calling the test function for each row. Just make sure that if a test
fails, it logs the data that caused that failure.
Not only does this make your tests easier to write and maintain, but it’s also
a great way to boost your test count statistics…
Explore
You know what I’m going to suggest—have a look through the tests on some recent project. How
many opportunities do you see to refactor parts of them into a data-driven style?
Practice 22 Simplify Logic with State Machines
Table-driven code is great for simplifying repetitive sequences of code. State
machines take this to the next level by adding context and the ability to
decide dynamically which code to run in a given situation.
(You may see state machines referred to as finite state automata or finite
state machines.)
However, a lot of FUD is directed at state machines. As a result many
developers avoid them. That’s just plain silly—a simple state machine can
make your code far easier to understand and change.
Idea 49
You don’t need libraries or design patterns to
write a state machine
I use state machines all the time, and each time they have improved the code
I was working on. Here are a few examples:
Parsing
I needed to parse a file that was almost in comma separated variable
(CSV), but it used backslash to escape characters.
Extracting information from a Shopify order
Shopify orders are complex beasts, with many record types and
intricate rules. A state machine helped me make sure the correct
information was presented in the right order.
Handling order fulfillment
A simple state machine handled the changes in an order’s fulfillment
status, generating shipments, refunds, and notification as needed.
Detecting patterns in log messages
I had to analyze web server log messages in real time, looking for times
where a particular URL was accessed three times within five seconds
from the same IP address. Many such patterns could overlap in the
stream of messages. This turned out to be simple, using a set of
dynamically generated state machines.
The list goes on.
Whenever you are handling a sequence of events, where each event affects
how the next event should be handled, consider using a state machine. If
these events are spread out over time, with potentially long delays between
each, the case for using a state machine is even more compelling. They’ll
make your life simpler.
Implementing State Machines
You don’t need complex libraries or long-winded pattern-based approaches
when you need a state machine. All you need is a lookup table.
Let’s start with a simple state machine—a push-button pen. Each time you
press the button, the tip extends if it was retracted and retracts if it was
extended.
A state machine is defined by events, states, and transitions. The machine
sits in a particular state until an event comes along. This may cause a
transition into a different state.
In the case of our retractable pen, we have the following:
One event type—the button was pressed.
Two states—extended and retracted.
Two transitions—extended→retracted and retracted→extended.
If you click the top when the pen is extended, it transitions to being
retracted, and if you click it when it’s retracted, it transitions to extended.
We draw state machines with the states in boxes or circles and the transitions
as arrows between states. The transitions are labeled with the event that
triggers them.
Here’s a state machine diagram that describes our retractable ball-point pen.
This is a simple diagram, but when they get more complicated, I like to see
how they work by putting my finger on a state and then imagining an
incoming event. I find the arrow labeled by that event, and my finger
follows it to the next state.
What about the implementation? Well, this particular state machine is so
simple that all we need is a Boolean:
let penRetracted =
true
eventStream.on(
"click"
, () => {
penRetracted = !penRetracted
}
It may not look like much, but that’s a working state machine. Still, let’s get
a little more complicated.
A More Complicated Example: A Keypad Lock
Here’s a keypad lock. It opens when you press 1 → 5 → 9 in sequence.
The user can press any number of keys before entering the correct
sequence.
If they enter a wrong digit, they must start over.
If they enter 1 in the middle of a valid sequence, it should reset the
sequence.
Try it
Before looking at the state diagram below, try sketching your own version. Use the finger technique
to make sure it correctly unlocks given the sequences 159, 432159, 15159.
Here’s my version of the state diagram:
The trick is returning to the “wait for second digit” state if a 1 is pressed in
the middle of what started as a valid sequence.
Implementing the Keypad Lock
To implement this, I’d use a lookup table (a dictionary, hash, map, or object,
depending on your language).
fsm/159.rb
TRANSITIONS = {
"wait
_for
_first
_
digit"
=> {
"1"
=>
"wait
_for
second
_
_
digit"
,
"other"
=>
"wait
_for
_first
_
digit"
,
},
"wait
_for
_
second
"5"
=>
"1"
=>
"other"
=>
_
digit"
"wait
_for
=> {
third
_
_
digit"
,
"wait
_for
second
_
_
digit"
"wait
_for
_first
_
digit"
,
,
},
"wait
_for
_
"9"
"1"
"other"
third
=>
=>
=>
_
digit"
"unlocked"
,
=> {
"wait
_for
second
_
_
digit"
"wait
_for
_first
_
digit"
,
,
},
"unlocked"
=> NIL
}
The entire state transition logic is encapsulated in this data structure.
Each state is a key in the dictionary.
The values are nested maps that define what state to transition to based
on incoming input.
The code that handles this is trivial:
fsm/159.rb
state =
"wait
_for
_first
_
digit"
while TRANSITIONS[state] && key = gets()
key = key. strip
» state = TRANSITIONS[state][key] || TRANSITIONS[state][
end
"other"
]
In fact, the actual state machine implementation is just one line of code (it
has the arrow in the margin).
But Wait, There’s More
At this point I could dive deep into all the other cool things you can do with
state machines. You can encode actions to take on each transition into the
table. You can have long-running state machines, which persist their state
between events. You can use state machines to drive workflows. And you
can turn much of the stuff that happens inside your code into events,
meaning you can use state machines to implement the logic of handling
them.
But that’s way too much detail for this book. If you’re interested (of course
you are), I have an article about it.[5]
The End of the Data Drive
Most of the chapters in this book don’t have a summary like this. But I feel
that this discussion of data and code is important enough to warrant it.
Over the years, I have come to appreciate the elegance and simplicity that is
achievable when you find the right balance between code and the data that
drives it. Too much code, and you lose flexibility. Too much data, and it can
be hard to see what the code does.
But the sweet spot, when the data drives the code, and the code is
decoupled from both the data and other code—that sweet spot is a magical
place to be.
Please, start to experiment with driving your code with simple data
structures. Start off gently. As you build an intuition, push yourself to use
data more and more.
I’ll be very surprised if you don’t come to like where you end up.
Keep your eyes open for opportunities
Over the coming months, look for opportunities to transition to a more data-driven style. Here are a
few things that you might come across:
If you see repetitive stanzas of code that differ by a few values, perhaps make it list driven.
Situations where a sequence of actions are taken, and that sequence changes depending on the
circumstances, could be implemented as a simple interpreter.
If you need to handle a stream of incoming events, and prior events affect the processing of
the next, then look into state machines.
That list is just to seed your imagination. The more you look, the more you’ll find ways to move
logic out of code and simplify your life. Carpe datum!
Footnotes
[5]
https://articles.pragdave.me/p/simplify-logic-with-state-machines
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Chapter 8
Down at the Codeface
I don’t care if you use two- or four-character indentation, whether you put
the opening brace at the start of the next line, or any of the other ridiculous
things developers argue about whenever code formatting comes up.
I care about two main things:
Is it simple to read?
Is it simple to edit?
Can I:
Find things quickly?
See the structure at a glance?
Add and remove things with the minimum number of collateral
updates?
Here I’m not talking about the design of the code; I’m talking about the
source files, the program text—the stuff I see in an editor buffer.
The practices in this chapter are things I do to make my code easier for me
to read and modify. But this is just my list.
Keep an eye on your own code. Are there patterns you use that make
changes more difficult? Do you ever find yourself scanning a page of code,
struggling to find what you need? If so, stop and ask yourself how you
might make it clearer next time.
Practice 23 No Comment
Some developers write comments. Lots of comments. Excessive numbers of
comments. Every file, every module, every function, every variable, and
every parameter has a novella attached to it, with all the types annotated,
the exceptions listed, and emergency contact information in case any of the
naming is triggering.
Idea 50 Make the code readable; cut back the
comments
As far as I’m concerned, this is a bad practice. First, it means that any
change to the code involves twice as much work: change the code, and you
have to make sure that you also update any related comment text. And,
because comments aren’t typically tested, there’s no guarantee that those
comment changes are correct. Over time, the comments become a net
negative; they aren’t accurate, so no one trusts them, and they’re a boat
anchor when it comes to making changes.
Some languages do have support for embedding tests in
comments. Elixir, for example, supports embedding sample
code snippets in comment blocks, along with the expected
results. It can then extract these and run them as unit tests,
ensuring that the code, when run, does in fact produce those
results. Also available are libraries that add that functionality to
other languages (Doctest-JS[6] for JavaScript, doctest[7] for
Python, and so on).
I think there are three good reasons to add comments to code:
You’re using a tool that will extract them and create documentation.
This is far and away the best way to document APIs and command-line
tools.
You need to tell a future reader of the code why you chose to do
something in an unexpected way. For example, “We add the refund
into the total because the API refund field is a negative number.”
To add #TODO and other flags (see the next practice).
Actually, there’s one more reason, and it’s probably the one I use the most. I
like to use comments to help clarify and break up the structure of my code.
For example, this book is built from 50 or so markdown source files,
controlled by a top-level manifest. That manifest file looks like this:
- part: ##########################
title: Simplify Your Environment
##########################
intro-wide: |
<imagedata alt=
fileref=
"Octahedron, the third Platonic solid"
"images/parts/octa.png" width=
"30%"/>
include:
-
-
Automate
Research
- part: ###########################
title: Simplify Your Interactions
###########################
intro-wide: |
<imagedata alt=
fileref=
"Dodecahedron, the fourth Platonic solid"
"images/parts/dodeca.png" width=
"30%"/>
include:
-
SoftSkills
I put comments around the names of the top-level parts just to make them
stand out. I often put lines of stars between major sections of source code.
When I’m feeling frisky, I’ll use an editor plugin that draws comment boxes
around function names.
We said it in The Pragmatic Programmer, 20th Anniversary
Edition [TH19], and I’ll say it again. If your code needs comments for any
other reason, the chances are it’s the code’s fault.
Part 1: Look for the commenting Goldilocks zone...
Too many comments are bad. No comments might be a little presumptuous in all but the simplest
code. So find a level you’re comfortable with.
Part 2: ...then cut them back
After a month or so of your new minimal comment regime, look back at your code. Are there any
comments that describe how some code works? Delete them; the code should speak for itself. Did
you find any comments describing what parameters to functions contained? Delete them and rename
the parameters to make it clearer. Make each comment justify its existence, then thank it for its
service.
Practice 24 TODO or Not TODO
When I’m heads-down writing code, I’ll often realize that a change I’m
making will affect another piece of code. Or perhaps while working on a
change, I’ll notice an unrelated bug in some adjacent code.
In the old days I’d head off, make those changes, then return to the original
task. But when I get back, I’ve lost context; I have to spend some time
rereading the code and repeating my initial analysis. Change is slow.
Now I do it differently. I look at the secondary change. If it’s something like
a simple typo or changing a parameter value, I’ll do it then and continue
working the original problem. For anything that’s bigger, I now slap in a
TODO comment.
shape = ellipse(r, r) # TODO:: could this just be a circle?
#
# . . . code I'm actually changing
My editor highlights[8] these in the code (in fact, it even highlighted the
previous code example as I typed it).
Neovim also has a handy-dandy project-wide summary of all TODO-type
comments:
I discovered a secondary benefit of doing this. Not only do I get changes
made faster, but I now have a list of small tasks I can use to fill in the five
minutes before a meeting starts.
Find your editor’s TODO functionality
I know that your editor will have something similar (a VS Code TODO highlighter plugin has over
five million installs).
Practice 25 Line ’em Up
This Ruby program contains a list of countries in the European Union.
COUNTRIES = [
"Austria"
,
Cyprus"
,
"Czech Republic"
,
"Greece"
,
"Hungary"
,
"Belgium"
,
"Bulgaria"
,
"Croatia"
,
"Republic of
"Denmark"
,
"Ireland"
,
"Estonia"
,
"Finland"
,
"Italy"
,
"Latvia"
,
"France"
"Lithuania"
,
"Germany"
,
"Luxembourg"
,
"Malta"
,
"Netherlands"
,
"Poland"
,
"Slovakia"
,
"Slovenia"
,
"Spain"
,
"Portugal"
,
"Sweden"
]
"Romania"
,
puts COUNTRIES. length #=> 26
When we print the length of the list, we get 26, but there should be 27. How
long does it take you to see the problem?
Here’s the same list, formatted a little differently.
COUNTRIES = [
"Austria"
,
"Cyprus"
,
"Finland"
,
"Hungary"
,
"Lithuania"
,
"Poland"
,
"Slovenia"
,
"Belgium"
,
"Czech Republic"
,
"France"
"Germany"
,
"Ireland"
,
"Luxembourg"
,
"Portugal"
,
"Spain"
,
"Bulgaria"
,
"Denmark"
,
"Greece"
,
"Italy"
,
"Malta"
,
"Romania"
,
"Sweden"
"Croatia"
,
"Estonia"
,
"Latvia"
,
"Netherlands"
"Slovakia"
,
,
]
puts COUNTRIES. length #=> 26
See the problem now?
Here’s another example of code that fails when run:
weight = containerContents. weight
size = containerContent. size
items = contaierContent. items
Can you see two errors? How about now:
weight = containerContents. weight
size = containerContent. size
items = contaierContent. items
The brain is incredibly good at seeing patterns. When things are lined up,
anomalies jump out at us. I find that adding the occasional space to put
things into columns finds an incredible number of stupid errors.
Idea 51 Help your brain find errors by using decent
layout
Practicalities
I wouldn’t do this if my editor didn’t handle aligning things with a couple
of keystrokes. For example, I’m typing this chapter using Neovim. To align
the previous example I selected the code ( v a s ) and then invoked the
EasyAlign plugin, telling it to align the equals signs ( g a = ). I bet your
editor has a plugin for this, too.
This kind of aligning can get out of hand when names are wildly different
lengths:
name =
address =
shipping_
country =
postal
code =
_
date =
"Nshuti"
"123 Some Street"
"Rwanda"
"12345"
"2025/01/01"
I find this harder to read, as my eye can get lost scanning across. However,
rather than abandoning the idea, I’ll typically align like-sized lines together.
name =
date =
address =
"Nshuti"
"2025/01/01"
"123 Some Street"
shipping_
country =
postal
code =
_
"Rwanda"
"12345"
Choose an alignment plugin for your editor
I don’t use VS Code much, but I just checked, and it seems to have dozens of alignment plugins. I
suspect the same is true for most editors. In my experience, it takes a while to find one that works
the way you think, but once you find something you like, learn how to drive it.
Practice 26 Dangle That Comma
Talking about lists of things, here’s a tip that can lead to some pretty serious
arguments.
When you write a list of things, you separate each element with a delimiter
character (often a comma):
[ 1, 2, 3 ]
Some languages (C, C#, C++, JavaScript, Python, and Ruby, to name a few)
allow a delimiter after the last element of a list:
[ 1, 2, 3, ] # still just three elements
Why does that little comma help make code easy to change? Let’s imagine
a list of the five largest lakes, ordered by size, starting with the largest:
BIG
_
LAKES = [
"Caspian"
,
"Superior"
,
"Victoria"
,
"Huron"
,
"Michigan"
]
The customer changes their mind and wants the list in alphabetic order. No
problem—you use your editor’s sort feature:
BIG
_
LAKES = [
"Caspian"
,
"Huron"
,
"Michigan"
"Superior"
, # syntax error
"Victoria"
,
]
What was the last element is now in the middle, and it has no comma after
it, so we get an error. With a trailing comma, however, the last element isn’t
special, and the list can be manipulated any way you’d like.
Practice 27 Sort ’em Out
If I’m typing in some kind of collection literal, and if the order of the items
doesn’t matter, then I’ll sort the items.
For example, TypeScript has enumerated types:
enum Purple {
Eggplant,
Lavender,
Lilac,
Mauve,
Rebecca,
Royal,
Violet,
}
I often use hashes (dictionaries) to pass in options. I sort the keys:
circle(
fill: RED,
stroke: BLACK,
text:
"push me"
,
x
_pos: 231,
y_pos: 34,
)
This is also a good candidate for alignment.
circle(
fill: RED,
stroke: BLACK,
text:
"push me"
,
x
_pos: 231,
y_pos: 34,
)
You may never feel the need to use this technique. But, even so, look for
times when you accidentally duplicate an item when adding it to an existing
list or when you lose your place typing a list in. If it happens, perhaps give
the sorting trick a go.
(This only applies if your editor lets you sort a selection of lines. I bet yours
does…)
Practice 28 Tall Beats Wide
You youngsters have it easy. When I were a lad, we celebrated the switch
from paper-roll teletypes to video terminals. Our screens were 80 characters
wide (the number of columns on a punch card) and 24 lines high, green on
black. And we loved it.
Now y’all have 56-inch 8K displays with pixels the size of atoms and a
built-in coffee maker.
The trouble is some folks open an editor full screen and type code until it
hits the right edge of the screen—200 characters, 300 characters, whatever
fits.
Reading this code is a nightmare. Many studies have shown that the
optimum line length when reading is between 45 to 75 characters. Much
longer and your eye can get lost, forcing you to rescan the line from the
beginning. And finding the beginning of that line can be tricky, too.
But line length is one of those things that start coffee-break arguments, so
let’s look at it a different way. Here’s the same code, written two ways.
First, compactly (sorry about the font size):
And now formatted onto multiple lines:
Think about maintaining this code. Maybe you need to add a new table and
the corresponding join clause. Clearly you can do it in either layout, but
which makes it easier?
When we were punching our code on cards, making lines as long as
possible reduced card count and the resulting back strain caused by carrying
the card deck to the reader. You young whippersnappers don’t have that
issue. Enjoy the freedom and stack your code down the screen. And if you
still want to use all your monitor, rotate it 90°.
Practice 29 Keep It Local
Back in college, I was taught that modularity and encapsulation were the
keys to writing maintainable software—it’s easier to change things if the
impact of that change is bounded by the perimeter of a module. That’s hard
to argue with; software (or just about anything for that matter) would be
impossible to work with if every change we made had a potentially global
impact.
But, as with all things, breaking code into modules isn’t always the right
thing to do, at least from the start. Sometimes the simplest way to create
something new is to break the rules.
Let’s look at a Rails application as an example. Now, before I get started, I
need to say that I’m not picking on Rails here: what I’m about to describe is
pretty universal. It’s just that I’m in the middle of converting a fairly large
Rails site as I’m writing, so the issues are fresh in my mind.
The Good and Bad of Conventions
Rails (quite rightly) promises “convention over configuration.” If you put
stuff in the right place, with the right name, Rails will find and use it without
the need for you to do any knitting. This can be a big time saver. It also
means you can look at any Rails project and find your way around: they all
look the same.
But, when followed slavishly, these conventions can actually make things
more difficult to change, particularly during the early stages of a project. To
illustrate this, let’s look at a simple Rails view.
Anatomy of a View
By convention, Rails apps are organized around the idea of resources. Each
resource will have a controller, a set of view templates, and most likely a
model—it’s an MVC framework. If we have a resource named customer, then
the source code of the controller will be in app/controllers/customers
controller
_
and the view templates will be in the directory app/views/customers. In
addition, Rails looks for the file app/helpers/customers
_
helper.rb. The helpers
are Ruby methods that you can call in any of the customer templates.
Finally, your view might need some CSS and some JavaScript.
That’s five files, widely spread across a directory tree. That’s not a tragedy,
but it does slow things down, particularly when you’re first writing the code.
└── app
├── assets
│ └── stylesheets
» │ └── customers.css
├──javascript
│ └── controllers
» │ └── customers.js
├─ controllers
» │ └── customers
controller.rb
_
├── helpers
» │ └── customers
_
helper.rb
└── views
└── customers
» └── show.html.erb
Here’s what I do:
└── app
├── controllers
» │ └── customers
controller.rb
_
└── views
└── customers
» └── show.html.erb
Two files: the controller and the view template. The controller code is
normally boilerplate, so most of my activity is in the template—that’s where
I put all my view code: CSS, JavaScript, helpers, and the template itself.
Here’s what one of those templates looks like:
show.html.erb
<style>
</style>
-- any view specific css
<script>
</script>
// any local JavaScript
<%
# any view helper functions (Ruby)
%>
<div>
</div>
-- and the template itself
I start by fleshing out the template. When I find I need some code (often to
do with formatting), I just add a function to the helper functions block in the
same file. In the rare cases I also need to do some stylin’, I add CSS to the
top of the file.
Being able to work in one place without switching back and forth makes my
life simple.
Should I find myself needing the same helper function in multiple views, I’ll
extract it into a normal xxx
_
helper.rb file. This doesn’t affect the template.
I can hear some of you saying, “We know that’s just wrong. You need to
follow the conventions.” Maybe you’re right. But so far I’ve seen no ill
effects. If I do, splitting the file will be easy.
I can also hear Elm and React developers saying, “You just realized this?
We’ve been doing it all along.” Indeed you have; indeed you have. And your
success doing so helped convince me that this approach is viable, and not
just for view components.
Splitting Regular Source Code
The “keep it local in one file” philosophy doesn’t just apply to Rails views. I
use it all the time.
When I’m writing some new code, I typically start out with a single file. I’ll
flesh out the outline, which will often involve creating new modules and
classes. I’ll just put them in that same file. As the code starts to take shape,
I’ll add more modules, again all in that one file. Why? Because it is so much
simpler to refactor as I experiment with alternative structures. Moving code
around, renaming things, and even just searching for things is easier.
When I get to the point where it’s stable, I step back and look at the whole
thing. I ask myself, When I come back to this in six months, how hard will it
be to pick it back up when it’s all one piece? Often I just leave it. But just as
often I’ll split it into separate source files, often in a subdirectory. In
addition, the second I want to share functionality from that code to some
other module, I’ll likely split the code I’m sharing out into its own file.
Doing so reduces the dependency footprint and therefore ties that other
module to less of the original code.
Eating My Own Dog Food
As I was typing this section, I realized that I also apply this approach while
writing. This book is written in Markdown. I know that I want a separate file
for each chapter, because that way I can build the chapters independently.
But initially that’s the only structure I put in place. As with coding, I spend a
lot of my time when writing moving stuff around, and having it all in one
place really helps.
It’s now a few months later. At some point, I must have needed to reorder
the content at the individual practice level, so this chapter is now one top-
level file and seven additional files in a subdirectory, each holding one
practice. (And yes, that seven may well change…)
Be unconventional
Are you working in an environment where code is split across multiple files by convention? Would
things break if you tried starting with everything in a single file?
Perhaps try it. If you’re on a team and don’t want them to beat you up about your radical code
organization, just use the technique locally as you create new functionality. Then, before you push
your changes, you can split your single file into many.
Along the way, see if the single-file solution makes things simpler. If so, perhaps mention it to your
team, and see if they’d like to experiment, too.
Even if they don’t, if the technique works for you, use it.
Footnotes
[6]
[7]
[8]
https://github.com/supabase/doctest-js
https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html
https://github.com/folke/todo-comments.nvim
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Chapter 9
Outroduction
It’s the end of the book, and I’ve managed to avoid the most difficult
question: What is simplicity? Or, putting it another way, How can I tell that
one way of doing something is simpler than another?
It’s a difficult question because, as with many things in this book, the
answer depends on the context. But there are some general things I look for
when evaluating a possible path forward.
S is probably simpler than C if the following are true:
S is easier to understand than C
Can I get an impression of what S does, and how it does it, faster
than I can with C?
Can I express what S does to someone else with simpler sentences
than with C?
Does S make me pause less often than C when I have to
deconstruct some gnarly code or use an obscure library?
Do I feel more confident that I could change S compared to C?
S has fewer parts than C
Does S have fewer components, dependencies, rules, or
conditions than C?
Can S achieve the same outcome with fewer steps than C?
S reflects the problem more directly than C
Does S more closely adhere to the idioms and language of the
problem than C?
Does C contain extra features, redundancy, or noise that S
eliminates?
Simplicity is the essence of clarity, minimalism, and ease. It means
stripping away the unnecessary to reveal what truly matters. In the design of
physical things, it’s about clean lines and intuitive function. In life, it’s
about focusing on what’s meaningful and eliminating distractions. In code,
it’s all of these.
Simplicity is not simple—it’s intentional, refined, and effective. It brings
peace, efficiency, and elegance.
Simplicity is not absolute. What is simple to one person may not be to
another. What is simple for someone might not have been simple for them
last year.
Simplicity has no litmus test. It has no metrics; no rules.
Ultimately, something is simple for me if I feel good about it. Does it have
that elusive quality without a name? Can I walk away from the keyboard
without nagging doubts? Does it feel right?
I urge you to simplify your code, your coding, and possibly even your life.
It will make you more productive and less stressed, and it will bring some
enjoyment—some fun—back to your work.
You deserve that.
Dave
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Appendix 1
Bibliography
[AIS77]
[Bec00]
[de 97]
[TH19]
Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein.
A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY, 1977.
Kent Beck. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace
Change. Addison-Wesley Longman, Boston, MA, 2000.
Gavin de Becker. The Gift of Fear. Little, Brown and
Company, New York, NY, First edition, 1997.
David Thomas and Andrew Hunt. The Pragmatic
Programmer, 20th Anniversary Edition. The Pragmatic
Bookshelf, Dallas, TX, 2019.
Copyright © 2025, The Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Thank you!
We hope you enjoyed this book and that you’re already thinking about
what you want to learn next. To help make that decision easier, we’re
offering you this gift.
Head on over to https://pragprog.com right now, and use the coupon code
BUYANOTHER2025 to save 30% on your next ebook. Offer is void
where prohibited or restricted. This offer does not apply to any edition of
The Pragmatic Programmer ebook.
And if you’d like to share your own expertise with the world, why not
propose a writing idea to us? After all, many of our best authors started
You May Be Interested In…
Select a cover for more information
Agile Web Development with Rails 7.2
Rails 7.2 completely redefined what it means to
produce fantastic user experiences and provides a
way to achieve all the benefits of single-page
applications—at a fraction of the complexity. Rails
7.2 integrated the Hotwire frameworks of Stimulus
and Turbo directly as the new defaults, together
with that hot newness of import maps. The result is
a toolkit so powerful that it allows a single
individual to create modern applications upon which they can build a
competitive business. The way it used to be.
Sam Ruby
(472 pages) ISBN: 9798888651049 $67.95
Programming Ruby 3.3 (5th Edition)
Ruby is one of the most important programming
languages in use for web development. It powers
the Rails framework, which is the backing of some
of the most important sites on the web. The Pickaxe
Book, named for the tool on the cover, is the
definitive reference on Ruby, a highly-regarded,
fully object-oriented programming language. This
updated edition is a comprehensive reference on the
language itself, with a tutorial on the most important features of Ruby—
including pattern matching and Ractors—and describes the language
through Ruby 3.3.
Noel Rappin, with Dave Thomas
(716 pages) ISBN: 9781680509823 $65.95
Programming Elixir 1.6
This book is the introduction to Elixir for
experienced programmers, completely updated for
Elixir 1.6 and beyond. Explore functional
programming without the academic overtones (tell
me about monads just one more time). Create
concurrent applications, but get them right without
all the locking and consistency headaches. Meet
Elixir, a modern, functional, concurrent language
built on the rock-solid Erlang VM. Elixir’s pragmatic syntax and built-in
support for metaprogramming will make you productive and keep you
interested for the long haul. Maybe the time is right for the Next Big
Thing. Maybe it’s Elixir.
Dave Thomas
(410 pages) ISBN: 9781680502992 $47.95
Engineering Elixir Applications
The days of separate dev and ops teams are over—knowledge silos and
the “throw it over the fence” culture they create are the enemy of
progress. As an engineer or developer, you need to confidently own each
stage of the software delivery process. This book
introduces a new paradigm, BEAMOps, that helps
you build, test, deploy, and debug BEAM
applications. Create effective development and
deployment strategies; leverage continuous
improvement pipelines; and ensure environment
integrity. Combine operational orchestrators such as
Docker Swarm with the distribution, fault tolerance,
and scalability of the BEAM, to create robust and reliable applications.
Ellie Fairholm and Josep Giralt D'Lacoste
(458 pages) ISBN: 9798888650677 $61.95
Serverless Apps on Cloudflare
Use serverless technologies to build applications
that scale, more quickly and easily, and without
worrying about deployment. Whether you’re
writing an API, a full-stack app, or real-time code,
harness the power of serverless on Cloudflare’s
platform so you can focus on what you do best:
delivering solutions. With hands-on instruction and
code samples throughout, you’ll go from building a
simple API to analyzing images with AI. And, when it’s time to launch,
you’ll learn how to deploy your applications and websites automatically,
and how to optimize their performance for production.
Ashley Peacock
(275 pages) ISBN: 9798888650714 $53.95
Seven Obscure Languages in Seven Weeks
Explore seven older computer languages and
discover new and fresh ideas that will change the
way you think about programming. These
languages were invented before we settled into our
current C-style syntax and OO biases, so language
designers were free to imagine what was possible.
You’ll find their insights thought-provoking, and
their ideas will inspire you to try different (and
possibly more productive) ways of programming. From a text
manipulation language where every line is a potential state machine
event, to a concurrent language where everything is done using actors,
you’re sure to come away from these seven languages inspired and
excited.
Dmitry Zinoviev
(270 pages) ISBN: 9798888650639
